[Amit Varma]: One of the things that bothers me about the discourse today is that too much of it is
[Amit Varma]: a discussion of people. We don't talk enough about ideas. And there too, we speak of people
[Amit Varma]: of the past as if they are caricatures, all good or all bad, not flesh and blood humans
[Amit Varma]: who contain multitudes. Jawaharlal Nehru is a classic example. In the discourse today,
[Amit Varma]: Nehru is either a visionary leader who made India secular and liberal, or he is a foolish
[Amit Varma]: autocrat whose bad decisions stopped India from coming out of poverty. Now, there is
[Amit Varma]: truth to both these pictures of Nehru. And there is nuance in everything that is true
[Amit Varma]: about him. He was a complicated man who lived through complicated times. And unlike most
[Amit Varma]: leaders of today, he loved diving into debates of ideas. Those debates matter because those
[Amit Varma]: ideas are still relevant today. And if we embrace the richness of those exchanges of
[Amit Varma]: ideas, we can make a little more sense of this world that we live in.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guests today are Tripur Daman Singh and Adil Hussain,
[Amit Varma]: co-authors of a wonderful book called Nehru, The Debates That Defined India. This book
[Amit Varma]: focuses on four debates that Nehru had with Mohammad Iqbal, Mohammad Ali Jinnah, Sardar
[Amit Varma]: Vallabhbhai Patel and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. Each debate is about a subject that lives
[Amit Varma]: on today. With Iqbal, Nehru argued about the uneasy relationship between nationalism on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand and religion and tradition on the other, in particular, Islam. In the course
[Amit Varma]: of this conversation, Iqbal, finding Nehru's argument somewhat naive, gives him a masterclass
[Amit Varma]: on his religion. Nehru's argument with Jinnah was about the communal question. Jinnah wanted
[Amit Varma]: the rights of minorities to be safeguarded because he was worried that in a Hindu majority
[Amit Varma]: country, a Hindu Raj, as he called it, was inevitable. Nehru thought the communal problem
[Amit Varma]: was an elite problem and the only thing they should focus on is how to solve the colonial
[Amit Varma]: problem – get the British out. In his brief debate with Sardar Patel, Nehru argues that
[Amit Varma]: China is India's friend and India should spurn America's friendship and be close
[Amit Varma]: to China. Patel took a realist foreign policy position and especially protested the way
[Amit Varma]: Nehru basically allowed China to take over Tibet. As for the debate with Shyama Prasad
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee, well, we discussed it the last time Tripur Dhaman came on the show to talk
[Amit Varma]: about his wonderful book, 16 Stormy Days. In that book, Tripur Dhaman had laid out what
[Amit Varma]: led to India's ghastly first amendment, which killed any possibility of free speech
[Amit Varma]: in India. My big TIL was that the courts had struck down our sedition law in 1950 because
[Amit Varma]: it was unconstitutional and Nehru wanted to use it against his political enemies, so he
[Amit Varma]: just went and changed the constitution. And he did this repeatedly over the years. Every
[Amit Varma]: time Nehru or his successors wanted to go against the constitution, they just amended
[Amit Varma]: it, so much so that B. R. Ambedkar himself said that given what had become of the constitution,
[Amit Varma]: he wanted to burn it. So, this fourth section is of Nehru's debates with Mukherjee, where
[Amit Varma]: Nehru is arguing that we should not take our fundamental rights seriously as they are a
[Amit Varma]: western import. And Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, the founder of the Jan Sangh, is making an
[Amit Varma]: eloquent defence of liberal values. Now, the best part of Tripur Dhaman and Adil's book
[Amit Varma]: is the structure. For each of these four sections, they write an introductory essay and then
[Amit Varma]: they let Nehru, Iqbal, Jinnah, Patel and Mukherjee speak for themselves. You will gain added
[Amit Varma]: admiration for all these men when you read their own words, and I recommend you buy the
[Amit Varma]: book and do so, instead of going by what others say about these people, read their own words
[Amit Varma]: for themselves. And of course, I disagree with Nehru's illiberal stance on free speech
[Amit Varma]: and he also messed up on China, as he himself realised painfully after the India-China war
[Amit Varma]: of 1962. He was wrong on economics also, so this book doesn't go there. But what is
[Amit Varma]: important, is that Nehru entered the discourse, engaged with his opponents and cared about
[Amit Varma]: ideas. There is so much for us to learn from that. I find that whole period of our intellectual
[Amit Varma]: history so fascinating and I loved this conversation with these two wonderful scholars. Before
[Amit Varma]: we get to it though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd
[Amit Varma]: love to help you. Since April 2020, I've enjoyed teaching 19 cohorts of my online course,
[Amit Varma]: The Art of Clear Writing, and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction. In the course itself, through 4 webinars spread over 4 weekends, I share
[Amit Varma]: all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much
[Amit Varma]: interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs 10,000
[Amit Varma]: plus GST or about $150 and registration is now open for my February 2020 cohort. Classes
[Amit Varma]: start on Saturday, February 5th. So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God-given talent, just a willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Adil and Tripurdaman, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest 2]: Thank you very much for inviting us, Samith. It's an absolute pleasure and an absolute
[Guest 2]: honor, as always.
[Amit Varma]: I've recorded with you before Tripurdaman. So, but that was really back in the day where
[Amit Varma]: episodes weren't 19 hours long, and we didn't spend five hours talking about somebody's
[Amit Varma]: childhood. So we didn't really talk much about the early part of your journey, which I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to get into. But I'll start with Adil since you're sort of new to the show and your
[Amit Varma]: background and you know, the kind of academic background you came from before you came to
[Amit Varma]: this book is also really fascinating to me. You were born in Sialkot in Pakistan, of course,
[Amit Varma]: but tell me a little bit about your childhood. What were your growing up years like? Did
[Amit Varma]: you have books around you? What were your early interests and your early conception
[Amit Varma]: of what you could go on to, you know, do in your life?
[Guest 1]: Wow. Hello, Amit, now that we are recording. So I don't remember reading much when I was
[Guest 1]: in Pakistan, which mainly had to do that I was really into sports. And that's something
[Guest 1]: that continued stretching forward all the way to my, I think, until I was 15. I really
[Guest 1]: decided that maybe I should pick up books and, you know, take this entire academic exercise
[Guest 1]: more seriously. Before then, it was really all the sports that I could play from cricket
[Guest 1]: to soccer to basketball. But growing up in Pakistan, particularly in the late 80s, it
[Guest 1]: was a strange time because it was a time where there was a lot of political instability,
[Guest 1]: where violence was first emerging in the public sphere on a scale that we later saw in the
[Guest 1]: 2000s. And then this stood in stark contrast to the 90s when my family moved to Germany.
[Guest 1]: And I got to see what was then considered the success of liberal democracy. So this
[Guest 1]: is a Germany in the 90s that had just reunited with the GDR. And here you have liberal democracies
[Guest 1]: being able to manage and absorb the collapse of the Soviet Union and do this in such a
[Guest 1]: way that the idea of the social welfare state was not threatened in the same way as it was,
[Guest 1]: for instance, in the UK, which didn't have to absorb any other part of the Soviet Union,
[Guest 1]: of course, but where reforms were going into that neoliberal direction, that things were
[Guest 1]: being cut. So Germany pulled off this trick. And it was a very exciting time to be a child
[Guest 1]: there. I enjoyed that greatly. I mostly went to schools that were influenced by the philosophy
[Guest 1]: and the teachings of Ignacio de Loyola, who was a Jesuit, and my schools were mainly Jesuit.
[Guest 1]: Growing up, I remember that there was a stark inclination for us to perform well in the
[Guest 1]: ancient languages that were no longer spoken. So Latin was big, Greek was big, English not
[Guest 1]: so much. I remember the first English lesson that I had was given by a Catholic monk who
[Guest 1]: told us that the great thing about the English literature, or English literature in general,
[Guest 1]: is that you can just read summaries and you don't need to read the actual works because
[Guest 1]: it's a language that lends itself to compression. And it took me some years to find out that
[Guest 1]: there's actually great English writing out there. In terms of early influences, and I'm
[Guest 1]: just focusing on the English ones, because I do think that most of your listeners would
[Guest 1]: probably want to maybe look up one thing or the other, were at that time mainly travel
[Guest 1]: writings. And I think really travel writing got me into reading in general, because travel
[Guest 1]: writing opened up this entirely new dimension, or this window into a new world where you
[Guest 1]: could, or somebody was trying to describe something to you, and mainly doing that in
[Guest 1]: an enthusiastic manner. So I was amazed about the sort of magic that people experienced.
[Guest 1]: There is a German writer called Karl May who wrote a series of books that were hugely popular
[Guest 1]: in the late 19th century, mainly his travel writings, and they were all invented. He never
[Guest 1]: left his village, but he wrote about, you know, how he encountered the Native Americans
[Guest 1]: and what is today the United States and other places. And, you know, those really, those
[Guest 1]: really influenced my early reading habits. Later, like after school, I went to do civilian
[Guest 1]: service, which is a mandatory year that you have to spend either in the military, or you
[Guest 1]: have to do the civilian alternative. It no longer exists because they've gotten rid of
[Guest 1]: it three years ago. So now when you're a German citizen and you're 18 and male, you no longer
[Guest 1]: have to either go into the army or do civilian service. I did civilian service in a hospice,
[Guest 1]: so it's mainly working with people who were terminally ill and who could no longer be
[Guest 1]: saved through the conventional wisdoms of medicine. And we were helping them trying
[Guest 1]: to live the last chapter of their lives with as much dignity as possible. After that, I
[Guest 1]: studied law, which you've probably seen. Studying law in Germany is an adventure in itself,
[Guest 1]: because they haven't really reformed much of the curriculum from the 19th century, which
[Guest 1]: means that the curriculum is still from a time when university disciplines weren't fully
[Guest 1]: formed. So this is before the emergence of history as a discipline, political science
[Guest 1]: as a discipline. And what you get to do when you study law is spend five years studying
[Guest 1]: everything a little bit. So you have politics, which is state law, where you learn about
[Guest 1]: the mechanics of the state. You have legal history, which has always been big in Germany,
[Guest 1]: particularly the history of Roman law. You have law and society, so courses that try
[Guest 1]: to go deeper into the ways in which the interaction between the making of rules and societies
[Guest 1]: relates. And it all ends with a truly 19th century thing, which is a big examination,
[Guest 1]: which is the only thing that counts in terms of grades and everything else is disregarded.
[Guest 1]: And in conventional German fashion, half of the people who write this exam fail, and they
[Guest 1]: usually take it at the age of 25, 26, which means that after you fail, you don't really
[Guest 1]: have a degree apart from your high school diploma. All of that has now been changed.
[Guest 1]: So I think five years ago, there was like a moderate reform, which said that after studying
[Guest 1]: law at a German faculty for three years, they would just give you a bachelor's degree. So
[Guest 1]: it just, you know, for the outside world, it looks like you're not falling back on nothing
[Guest 1]: in case you fail the state exam. After the state exam, I was lucky to win a scholarship
[Guest 1]: that allowed me to study more or less whatever I wanted within the European Union. And that
[Guest 1]: really got me to Cambridge. And since I could study whatever I want, I thought like, hey,
[Guest 1]: I'm interested in Indian history. So I studied Indian history. It was an exciting time at
[Guest 1]: Cambridge, not only because I got to meet Tripu Daman, who's the co-author of this book,
[Guest 1]: but also because in Cambridge, there was a merger happening of two things. One was, Cambridge
[Guest 1]: had always been big in imperial history. So they've always been big on the British colonies.
[Guest 1]: And part of that is, of course, the colonial legacy. And it was called, I don't know, the
[Guest 1]: Chairs of Imperial History, and you had old returning civil servants, you know, expounding
[Guest 1]: wisdoms to the new ones who want to branch out into the colonies. But it had undergone
[Guest 1]: a conceptual shift towards studying the continent, not from a perspective of governance. So how
[Guest 1]: can we from Britain govern India well, to a perspective of what actually happened on
[Guest 1]: the ground. And there were many people who were doing world history in that fashion.
[Guest 1]: Foremost, Sir Christopher Bailey, who's written a number of books in this regard. The other
[Guest 1]: tradition in Cambridge that was always big and that attracted me was intellectual history.
[Guest 1]: That is the history of political thought. And Cambridge has always been doing that,
[Guest 1]: because they early on had like the modesty of saying that the only thing that we can
[Guest 1]: really know is not to answer the huge philosophical questions that life offers us, but like the
[Guest 1]: smaller ones and trying to understand why people thought in a certain manner. And coming
[Guest 1]: to the discipline as a lawyer was, of course, something that helped me in that because part
[Guest 1]: of the civil law tradition has always been to understand what the legislator meant when
[Guest 1]: he created that rule. So legal methodology, say, in the case law system is mainly precedent.
[Guest 1]: So you try to understand a ruling that has been passed down by a judge. In the civil
[Guest 1]: law tradition, it has always been more intellectually challenging in the sense that you always try
[Guest 1]: to get into the head of the legislator. So something that you see in the originalism
[Guest 1]: debates around the Constitution in the US. So for me, trying to figure out what people
[Guest 1]: were thinking at the time, and elucidating that for the present has always been something
[Guest 1]: that I found exciting. And that was happening within intellectual history. Now, at the time
[Guest 1]: that I was at Cambridge, these two disciplines were trying to meet. And they were trying
[Guest 1]: to meet through to a number of people who were doing research in both regards. The foremost
[Guest 1]: one, of course, is my supervisor, Shruti Kapila, who's recently published a book, Violent Fraternity,
[Guest 1]: that really encapsulates possibly the decade that I've spent at Cambridge, because it sort
[Guest 1]: of summarizes many of the graduate students that were coming, not summarizes, but that
[Guest 1]: in a way foreshadows the work of many of the graduate students that were being trained
[Guest 1]: at that time. And Cambridge at that time is also was also unusual, because there were
[Guest 1]: so many of us, there were so many PhD students who were doing, who were working on Indian
[Guest 1]: history. And I don't think that's ever been repeated, either in the in the in the decades
[Guest 1]: before or after. But that was just like a, I don't know, like a incident of luck. So
[Guest 1]: Cambridge was very, was very enlightening in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's, that's a very lucid summary. And I wouldn't want to compress it even a
[Amit Varma]: little bit, even though you spoke in English, you know, that little anecdote reminded me
[Amit Varma]: of, there was this recent thing that happened on Twitter, where I happened to mention, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how many books I read last year. And someone without naming me per se, just started
[Amit Varma]: this whole thread on how this cult of reading is harming people and people should not read,
[Amit Varma]: they should just experience things. And I remember one of the comments there was that
[Amit Varma]: I don't read books, I just read book summaries. But even if you read book summaries, you can
[Amit Varma]: just read one book summary a week. So how has this guy read so many books now? What
[Amit Varma]: can one even say to that? By the way, speaking of Shruti Kapila, I'll be recording with her
[Amit Varma]: next week, in fact, on Thursday, so exactly a week from now. So that'll be fun. I'm reading
[Amit Varma]: a book right now as well. And big admirer of Christopher Bailey as well. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: good opportunity to speak to you guys. Now, you know, before we get to Tripur Dhamma,
[Amit Varma]: I just want to double click on a couple of things. And one of them is, you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that one of the qualities of the law education that you got in Germany was that it was a
[Amit Varma]: very 19th century conception in the sense that a bunch of other disciplines were mixed
[Amit Varma]: in in terms of understanding the society, understanding history, the economy, all of
[Amit Varma]: those things. And do you feel that in a sense that was a feature and not a bug, just in
[Amit Varma]: terms of how one thinks about it? Because the people that I find to be the most interesting
[Amit Varma]: thinkers who bring insight on any one field, are people who are really bringing interdisciplinary
[Amit Varma]: lenses. And you later said that, you know, your legal lens, for example, helped you when
[Amit Varma]: you were looking at intellectual history, and so on. So tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: And is this something that you've consciously thought of? Is this something that when you
[Amit Varma]: look around you at academics, and, you know, maybe different departments somewhere, is
[Guest 1]: it visible? Do these lenses make a difference? I do think that these lenses make a difference.
[Guest 1]: And particularly speaking of the sort of German legal tradition, I think, I'm trying to produce
[Guest 1]: universalists has always been more. It is always more interesting to converse with a
[Guest 1]: universalist than it is with an absolute narrow specialist. But within that universalism,
[Guest 1]: there's also a type of parochialism that are sort of crept into it. And for Germany, that
[Guest 1]: has always been the language issue. So German academia in general was very slow to adapt
[Guest 1]: or adopt to the English language, which means that most German lawyers would still publish
[Guest 1]: in German only. The concept of peer review hasn't really received widespread acceptance
[Guest 1]: in the sense that most people still think that when they reach the level of a full professor,
[Guest 1]: their work should no longer be peer reviewed, but just printed as they write it. So there
[Guest 1]: is a specific tradition that also leads to a disconnection from the global conversation.
[Guest 1]: Now, if that is a good or bad thing, I can't really judge. It is a good thing in the sense
[Guest 1]: that German lawyers are still speaking to each other in a way that you see no longer
[Guest 1]: happening within the splintering of the English academy, right? So there's many different
[Guest 1]: strands that have now emerged. And it's more about building up disciplinary boundaries
[Guest 1]: than it is about developing a fruitful conversation. So the good thing about German law is that
[Guest 1]: everybody still can speak to each other, regardless if you're doing public law, if you're doing
[Guest 1]: civil law or criminal law. So there's a conversation that is still taking place because everybody
[Guest 1]: has undergone the same education. But at the same time, I do think that the question around
[Guest 1]: the German language that many refuse to publish in any other language has led to the specific
[Guest 1]: parochialism. And you also see that in other disciplines like in sociology. So somebody
[Guest 1]: like Jürgen Habermas, his works were only published in English, I think, two decades
[Guest 1]: ago, even though in Germany, they have existed for, I don't know, four or five decades. So
[Guest 1]: in the sense, you still see that there's only a very slow shift to contributing to the sort
[Guest 1]: of global debates. And now that we're living in a very, very globalized world, that can
[Guest 1]: be slightly awkward.
[Amit Varma]: And my other question to you before I get to Thrupadhaman, and this actually comes from
[Amit Varma]: something that I've been thinking about a lot, how do we form our conceptions of the
[Amit Varma]: world? And when I look at the way that I look at India, obviously, you know, you grow up
[Amit Varma]: having a particular idea of India in your head. And then as you sort of, you know, explore
[Amit Varma]: the world and explore the world of ideas, especially you kind of, you know, more and
[Amit Varma]: more nuance gets added on till you realize that the truth is deeply, deeply complicated
[Amit Varma]: beyond the simplistic notions you might have had of what a nation sort of is. What were
[Amit Varma]: your sort of ideas of Pakistan and in a sense, India also growing up? I mean, I know you
[Amit Varma]: spent a substantial part of your life in Germany and outside Pakistan per se. But you know,
[Amit Varma]: what is that process like where, to you, what did Pakistan mean? And, you know, over time,
[Amit Varma]: how did that kind of change? Was it easy to, at some point, then get this passionate about
[Amit Varma]: it? Like when you write about, you know, India and Pakistan as a historian of ideas, you're
[Amit Varma]: not really in a sense, at that point, writing about your country, you're writing about something
[Amit Varma]: that is abstract, that is up there, you're writing about it in the 30s and the 40s, and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. Take me a little bit through that process of how the idea of Pakistan evolved
[Amit Varma]: for you personally.
[Guest 1]: I mean, going back chronologically, because that's what your question aimed at, I do
[Guest 1]: think as a child, we are just excited about any theory that is sort of presented to us
[Guest 1]: that, you know, sort of breaks down the world in very simple terms, and we can adopt it.
[Guest 1]: And if there's some type of passion that we can develop through it, be it some type of
[Guest 1]: nationalism, etc, then, you know, we are automatically drawn to it. And I do think particularly men
[Guest 1]: are even more drawn to it than women, because it creates this sort of very tribal, ritualistic
[Guest 1]: almost experience that we can have together. I don't really believe that my desire of trying
[Guest 1]: to understand Pakistan has very much changed, because the desire that I had to understand
[Guest 1]: things deeper that were happening around me in Pakistan is still the same. So I do think
[Guest 1]: it's basically curiosity. So for me, curiosity has always trumped a sense of tribal belonging,
[Guest 1]: regardless of what that is. And that has, in a way, not really made me immune, because
[Guest 1]: you can never be totally immune to sort of the society that you're sort of thrown into,
[Guest 1]: as Heidegger would say, but essentially, it has helped me to make better sense of what
[Guest 1]: was going on around me. And I do think that that curiosity is still what is driving me
[Guest 1]: in my attempt to understand what the ideological background was of the specific formation of
[Guest 1]: ideas from separatism to liberal internationalism and constitutionalism and its different forms.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so let's, let's move on now to Tripurthaman. You know, we discussed very briefly, I think,
[Amit Varma]: your kind of academic background and so on. But tell me a bit about your childhood. Where
[Amit Varma]: did you grow up? What was that like? And if you were to sort of answer the same question,
[Amit Varma]: from a point of view of India, how you look at India differently as the years go on. And,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously, your engagement with the past becomes even more real in modern times. Because
[Amit Varma]: as you've pointed out in your book, all of those debates are being relived all over again.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the past is still so alive.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, so I grew up, I grew up in Agra, and I also went to school here. So I was,
[Guest 2]: I lived here till the age of 18. And I went to a bit like a deal, I went to a Catholic
[Guest 2]: school. And, you know, this, this sort of engagement with Christianity and Christian
[Guest 2]: ideas was very much, you know, a part of my, my school life. And I, you know, always found
[Guest 2]: history interesting. And so I read a lot both in school and outside. And, you know, curiosity,
[Guest 2]: of course, there's only really one way to deal with it, which is to kind of give in.
[Guest 2]: So I, you know, I read a lot. And I also was very interested in politics. Now, partly that
[Guest 2]: had to do with the fact that my father was a politician. So it was very much not something
[Guest 2]: that you read about in the newspapers, it was something that, you know, was, you know,
[Guest 2]: a big part of our lives, it was a part of dinner table conversations. And so I it and
[Guest 2]: now when I look back, it's actually a very interesting way of growing up, because it
[Guest 2]: gives you a kind of behind the scenes insight into so many things that people write about
[Guest 2]: or talk about. And I always saw a bit of a disconnect as to how things you know, what
[Guest 2]: was really going on, and how it was, for example, being written about in newspapers or commented
[Guest 2]: on on on TV. And so for me, that that sort of disconnect has been has been very, very
[Guest 2]: crucial to, I guess, a lot of my intellectual habits as well, because for me, the subjects
[Guest 2]: that really draw me in, is where I feel that there is that there is a sense of disconnect
[Guest 2]: between, you know, between how people are talking about it or perceiving it. And you
[Guest 2]: know, what, what really, I feel like what, what was really going on. So that's, that's
[Guest 2]: something I think that's fed into, into into picking up the subjects that I, that I do
[Guest 2]: pick up, because in a lot of them, that's, you know, that's where my sense of curiosity
[Guest 2]: or interest in it really comes in. Yeah, so then after school, I went to university in,
[Guest 2]: in Britain, I studied politics and international relations as an undergraduate degree. And
[Guest 2]: like Adil, I wasn't initially drawn to political theory and philosophy, mainly because I often
[Guest 2]: found it a bit too abstract. But international relations, you know, I and and politics, that
[Guest 2]: sort of thing, really, it really got me interested. And mainly, it was, it was a steep uphill
[Guest 2]: learning curve, doing a degree in those subjects, because I found myself quite unprepared, I
[Guest 2]: had very little experience writing essays, I hadn't, I hadn't really studied those subjects
[Guest 2]: before. And so for me, there was, and plus, there was a sense of, you know, obvious cultural
[Guest 2]: dislocation having moved home. And so for me, that was a very formative experience.
[Guest 2]: And I remember writing my first essay, I don't even remember what it was about. But I remember
[Guest 2]: getting a grade and I got, you know, a first and there was, there was such a, you know,
[Guest 2]: thrill to being able to produce a well argued and well structured piece of writing. You
[Guest 2]: know, I realized that actually, you know, this is this is interesting, this is fun.
[Guest 2]: And it really, you know, in a way, scratches an itch, you, the ability to kind of think
[Guest 2]: about and read about what you, what you're really interested in, and then to be able
[Guest 2]: to argue about what you think, and to be able to, even if you don't convince the person
[Guest 2]: you're, you know, who's grading it, who's looking at it, but you know, who appreciates
[Guest 2]: just how you've done it, you know, that, that, that was a thrill. And like Adil, many, once
[Guest 2]: you're exposed to the world of theory, once you know, you have the explanatory power of,
[Guest 2]: of theories and ideas at your disposal, you know, it's a bit like a light going off in
[Guest 2]: your brain, you suddenly see, okay, you know, I can explain the world this way, or I can
[Guest 2]: understand it in that way. And once you know, a lot of those things somehow accumulated
[Guest 2]: in my head, I started to grow, go back to being much more interested in, in India. Concurrently
[Guest 2]: over those, like, you know, along that time, I also had the chance to work into elections
[Guest 2]: in India. So, you know, I, that sort of interest and engagement with Indian politics, and the
[Guest 2]: kind of what really sort of underpins the political debates and ideas in India, then
[Guest 2]: it grew many fold. So I went to Cambridge, and there I did an MPhil in modern South Asian
[Guest 2]: studies, which was the same as Adil. And it was my first real, substantial engagement
[Guest 2]: with, with the world of Indian history and Indian politics. Of course, I'd had practical
[Guest 2]: engagement with Indian politics courtesy of my father. But this was the real, you know,
[Guest 2]: the first real, substantial intellectual engagement. And, again, it was really interesting, I learned
[Guest 2]: a lot. And as I learned, I also, you know, I also, the desire to learn a lot more kind
[Guest 2]: of grew. And I had Christopher Bailey as my supervisor for my MPhil. And I was really
[Guest 2]: interested in what I was writing about. I was at that point working on Rajput groups
[Guest 2]: and the idea of sovereignty in 19th century India. And Chris suggested that, you know,
[Guest 2]: I should maybe think about a PhD. I did. And, you know, that was that turned out to be probably
[Guest 2]: one of the best decisions that I've taken, because it really, now when I look back, you
[Guest 2]: know, it really gives you essentially four years of your life, five years of your life
[Guest 2]: to think and write. And that's, that's a luxury. That's an absolute luxury. And so, as Adil
[Guest 2]: mentioned, that was also a particular time in Cambridge where these two sort of, you
[Guest 2]: know, imperial history, the traditions of imperial history and intellectual history
[Guest 2]: were really trying to come together. And it was a time of intellectual ferment. We met
[Guest 2]: so many interesting people. There was a collection of people who there at that point in time,
[Guest 2]: which you can't really replicate. So it made for a very exciting intellectual environment.
[Guest 2]: There was Chris Bailey, there was Shruti Kapila, there was Joy Chatterjee. And then there was,
[Guest 2]: there was Shailja Fennell. And then, of course, there were a whole load of postdocs and graduate
[Guest 2]: students who were there off and on for a short span of time. I remember Audrey Truschke was
[Guest 2]: there for a bit. And our friend Ali Khan was there. And there was, there was such an interesting
[Guest 2]: group of people that you couldn't help but have, develop a very wide range of interests
[Guest 2]: even within your, within your specialist field of South Asian history. So it was, it was
[Guest 2]: an intellectually very exciting time. And once having been through it, I realized actually
[Guest 2]: A, there was a lot that I didn't know, and B, that, you know, it was something that I
[Guest 2]: really enjoyed. And so that interest, that kind of, I still have that sense of enjoyment
[Guest 2]: when I do research and when I do writing. And there's still a, you know, I still have
[Guest 2]: that curiosity about wanting to know more. Because A, as you mentioned, we see that the
[Guest 2]: past is still alive in India in many ways. But also India supplies a kind of almost inexhaustible
[Guest 2]: intellectual stimulation, because it's a country where so much is constantly going on. And
[Guest 2]: even when you, for me, now that I've been in Britain for so long, I often people will
[Guest 2]: talk about British politics. And I say, you know, it's just really boring. And compared
[Guest 2]: to India, it is. Because India never reaches a level of, you can never say it's sterile.
[Guest 2]: There's the past and the present kind of meld into one. And it's a sort of explosion of
[Guest 2]: ideas that's constantly going on. And so it supplies an almost, there's an almost inexhaustible
[Guest 2]: supply of intellectual stimulation. So I don't think my interest is ever going to run dry
[Guest 2]: in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: So here's something I'd love to ask you. This common question keeps getting raised that
[Amit Varma]: hey, you know, pre-independence, we had such great leaders, such giants and all that and
[Amit Varma]: look at the politicians today and blah, blah, blah. And that's a continuous lamin that happens.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember I'd written a column for Bloomberg Quint once about it from an economics point
[Amit Varma]: of view, where I said that you got to look at the incentives that back when our freedom
[Amit Varma]: fighters kind of came up and they got into the business, there was no power at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it, they were animated by principles. So, you know, the kind of people who are coming
[Amit Varma]: in are the kind of people who are animated by principles. And that's kind of what you
[Amit Varma]: get. And that's reflected in the debates where the debates are about so much about ideas,
[Amit Varma]: of course, tempered by practicality is, you know, you've given various examples of within
[Amit Varma]: this book, but it's so kind of rich with ideas. Whereas my point was that, given that we kind
[Amit Varma]: of took over the colonial apparatus of the coercive state from the British and given
[Amit Varma]: that that's the kind of state we have, you know, anyone who enters politics today is
[Amit Varma]: only motivated by the lust for power. And therefore, that's the kind of person you will
[Amit Varma]: get it's about incentives. And obviously, it's slightly provocative. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as you're from a political family yourself, you know, not at all meant as an insult to
[Amit Varma]: people who are in politics today. But I'm just wondering that, you know, you've had
[Amit Varma]: dinner table conversations about politics, you've kind of seen the world of politics
[Amit Varma]: intimately around you, you pointed out that it's very different from what our people imagine
[Amit Varma]: otherwise in the popular imagination. And at the same time, you've studied, for example,
[Amit Varma]: politics of the past, as you sit down at your family table as a young boy, and the elders
[Amit Varma]: are talking politics, you might also be able to imagine, say, Jawaharlal Nehru sitting
[Amit Varma]: at the table with Motilal Nehru and all the others, and they are talking politics, right?
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that there is a change in the discourse in the general political discourse?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that, you know, politics is animated today less by ideas, and more by the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: of modern politics, which are electoral imperatives, you got to win elections, you got to get votes,
[Amit Varma]: how do you do that? You know, I'm not passing judgment on either this or that. It's just
[Amit Varma]: the way the world has changed. So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest 2]: That's completely true. So the first kind of reason that you gave the fact that actually
[Guest 2]: there was no power at the end of it, or there was no kind of presumption that there would
[Guest 2]: be power at the end of it, made anti-colonial politics into a whole different game. And
[Guest 2]: you can see what in the way people stack up. So at that point, what was considered a lucrative
[Guest 2]: and attractive career was the civil service. And so people who were, you know, really smart,
[Guest 2]: interested in having a lucrative career, or, you know, a kind of well-paid, stable career
[Guest 2]: would look at the civil service. That's where power was, that's where honor was, that's
[Guest 2]: where, you know, you gained respect and stature. And crucially, a lot of very smart, very intelligent,
[Guest 2]: also in some ways very patriotic people ended up going to civil service, because that's
[Guest 2]: where, you know, that's what gave them what they wanted. The people who ended up in the
[Guest 2]: nationalist movement were often tended to be those who were not attracted by those things,
[Guest 2]: because if they had been attracted by, essentially by money, by power, etc, they would have gone
[Guest 2]: into the civil service. So you do have the odd person like Bose, who gives up a career
[Guest 2]: in the civil service. And it's a big thing at that point in time to give up a career
[Guest 2]: in the civil service and join the nationalist movement. But the vast majority were people
[Guest 2]: who were either unsuccessful in that stream, or completely not interested in that side
[Guest 2]: of things. So it did attract a broad spectrum of people who were motivated by a kind of
[Guest 2]: overarching goal of achieving independence, and not really interested in in in in health,
[Guest 2]: honor, power, etc. Also, equally, there was no guarantee that, as you say, at the end
[Guest 2]: of it, what would happen, independence may come 10 years down the line, 20 years down
[Guest 2]: the line, 30 years down the line, as it did for many of these people, as I think Nehru
[Guest 2]: is the one who, who, who said, you know, when asked about questioned about partition and
[Guest 2]: why they didn't fight harder, say something to the extent of we were tired old men. Basically,
[Guest 2]: yes. But on the other hand, if we talk about it, purely when thinking about intellectual
[Guest 2]: standing, then, then I think the situation is not necessarily the idea that somehow,
[Guest 2]: there's been degradation, like a kind of bell curve, like degradation, where we reached
[Guest 2]: the peak, and then we, you know, just all went downhill. I don't think I don't think
[Guest 2]: that's, that's true. Because there are plenty of as, as Shruti Kapila, for example, argues
[Guest 2]: in her in her book, India, India was never really a world of ideas, where ideas were,
[Guest 2]: you know, there were very few political theorists of that kind, who just wrote ideas down on
[Guest 2]: paper, the thinkers were also the doers. And so to understand modern day India very much
[Guest 2]: is to take is to look at political action as a source of political ideas and political
[Guest 2]: thought. And so once if we were to accept that, I don't think you could legitimately
[Guest 2]: argue that people there's been a kind of straightforward degradation of, of intellectual standing,
[Guest 2]: because there has been, there has been a lot going on. And there are a lot of ideas that
[Guest 2]: are expressed, and I don't think they expressed any worse than, than what they were 70 years
[Guest 2]: ago, 100 years ago, you know, unless maybe a deal might want to might want to jump in
[Guest 2]: at this point.
[Guest 1]: Maybe, maybe just a little too, too, too, to add what Dhrupadaman said, every political
[Guest 1]: generation has to answer the question of the time. Now, the question of the time that the
[Guest 1]: Founding Fathers were trying to answer was one where there was universal agreement, and
[Guest 1]: that is about independence, that is about self governance. Now, that agreement stretched
[Guest 1]: over the very narrow sort of firm South Asian intellectual clique, and that was widely respected
[Guest 1]: around the world. So from the time of the Enlightenment, there was the idea that, you
[Guest 1]: know, legitimacy can no longer be derived from these sort of higher up motives that
[Guest 1]: you can have, like be it from religion, or from, you know, any, any, any other strands,
[Guest 1]: and it was generally agreed that it's sort of rationality that allows you to participate
[Guest 1]: in any political setting. Now, racism could stem it only this much, right, the idea that
[Guest 1]: oh, but some people are better than others, and therefore should rule over others, was
[Guest 1]: a brief thing that most people had given up by the mid 20th century. When you had a problem
[Guest 1]: in England, the best doctor was an Indian, you would go to that doctor, you would not
[Guest 1]: say, oh, but you know, I have this sort of racist idea that white men are always going
[Guest 1]: to be better, because you've seen enough white men botching up things. So therefore, you
[Guest 1]: would go to the best was recommended to you. And I do think that the complexity that modern
[Guest 1]: political life sort of throws at politician just makes their job a lot more difficult.
[Guest 1]: The constant surveillance through mass media is just a completely different ballgame. So
[Guest 1]: I'm not trying to play down the accomplishments of the founding fathers, they were great.
[Guest 1]: But in a way, the main question that they were trying to answer was one where there
[Guest 1]: was wide agreement, not universal agreement, but wide agreement. So it was clear that,
[Guest 1]: you know, they had it much easier to position themselves, whereas now it's just a lot more
[Guest 1]: complicated with the geopolitics that sort of plays into it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a great point. And also, you know, as far as a question of the time was
[Amit Varma]: concerned back then, one, of course, there are these larger, more animating things that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, everyone can kind of find common ground on. So for Nehru, it might be the independence
[Amit Varma]: of the nation, for Iqbal, it is that, but it is also about Islam and what's happening
[Amit Varma]: to it and community and so on. And there are all these sort of different ideas they can
[Amit Varma]: agree on. But I kind of suspect if you, you know, go to an Amit Shah or anybody in any
[Amit Varma]: party, really, and ask them, what is a question of the time for you, it'll be something like,
[Amit Varma]: how do I win the next election? You know, it's just that the incentives have changed.
[Amit Varma]: And I understand that to a certain extent, politics is deeply complicated now. And you
[Amit Varma]: can't play down the amount of skill that is required. But when I sort of look at the discourse
[Amit Varma]: around me, like I was reading, for example, just in the first section of your book when
[Amit Varma]: Nehru and Iqbal have that exchange, and my God, they write so well, especially Nehru,
[Amit Varma]: where he's writing from Almora jail, and he's quoting Bertrand Russell from memory. And
[Amit Varma]: it's just such beautiful, fluid writing. You know, I was chatting about it with a friend
[Amit Varma]: and I said, you know, like, you have to read Nehru to remember what a fine writer he was.
[Amit Varma]: One may or may not agree with a lot of his ideas. I certainly have very mixed feelings
[Amit Varma]: about those, but such a fine writer and my friend asked me, so okay, who in modern times
[Amit Varma]: writes like that? And the thing is, I couldn't think of an Indian politician, I had to say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people like Pratap Bhanu Mehta, Ramchandra Guha, Suhas Palshikar, they are
[Amit Varma]: the kind of people, you know, engaging with the world of ideas. But our politicians today
[Amit Varma]: are thinking about different things, kind of obsessed with different things. The nature
[Amit Varma]: of the discourse is completely different. And I'll move on to my next related question
[Amit Varma]: with that, that while reading these letters, one of the things that struck me these letters
[Amit Varma]: that people are writing to each other, not just, you know, these columns by Nehru and
[Amit Varma]: Iqbal, but even, you know, the letters that say, Nehru and Patel are writing to each other
[Amit Varma]: and so on. In all of these letters and in the correspondences between Gandhi and Tagore,
[Amit Varma]: for example, they are so carefully thought out, people are sitting down, taking time,
[Amit Varma]: engaging with the subject, you know, you have Iqbal quoting Gibbon, you have Nehru quoting
[Amit Varma]: Hazar people in different letters, you have all of that happening. And part of the reason
[Amit Varma]: for that, I suspect is that there is of course, you know, your attention is not scattered
[Amit Varma]: in the million ways that it is today. You know, if I want to talk to a political comrade,
[Amit Varma]: say if I'm Nehru and I want to write to Jinnah, I can't send a two write email or an emoji
[Amit Varma]: or a message on WhatsApp, I've got to sit down and draft a letter. And Jinnah will also
[Amit Varma]: sit down and draft a letter. And that's how the game plays out. And both of you are obviously
[Amit Varma]: excellent counter examples of that. But that is also a little bit of selection bias because
[Amit Varma]: you've done academics and you've been through all of that. But do you think in general,
[Amit Varma]: in modern times, that there are disincentives for that kind of a well thought out reason
[Amit Varma]: discourse to even develop in the first place, where everything is instant comments on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And you know, where are the conversations happening? And the reason I
[Amit Varma]: ask is I'm very happy to be corrected by you guys on this because I realised that a lot
[Amit Varma]: of my perspectives come because I'm an English speaking elite. And that's really the language
[Amit Varma]: in which I'm doing all my reading and even if I can speak two or three other languages,
[Amit Varma]: whereas a lot of politics is simply not in these languages. So it is possible that there
[Amit Varma]: is a richer discourse, which I might not simply be aware of, or there is a discourse which
[Amit Varma]: is not happening in these long reason conversations, but dialogues happening in other ways. So
[Amit Varma]: you know, what would your responses be to that?
[Guest 2]: I think in one way, you're absolutely right, because the medium of writing lends itself
[Guest 2]: to thought a lot better than than a 280 character tweet or a five line email or a WhatsApp message.
[Guest 2]: You are forced to think and the act of writing in itself forces you to clarify what you're
[Guest 2]: thinking. You can't send, you know, you can't send a two page letter if you're not able
[Guest 2]: to clearly express what you want to say. So it lends itself to thinking, it also lends
[Guest 2]: itself to clarity. So in that sense, I guess there's already a kind of pre existing bias
[Guest 2]: if you take up written letters or written documents against newspaper columns, or so
[Guest 2]: on and so forth. But it's also my belief that any sort of substantial intellectual output
[Guest 2]: will come through writing, or if not through writing, at least through voluminous speaking.
[Guest 2]: So if you look at, for example, Nehru's debates in the last chapter of the book, they're actually
[Guest 2]: all spoken, it's not, it's not written text. But it's it's still if you read it, you know,
[Guest 2]: you still it's it still looks like it's, you know, very well written. But that really doesn't
[Guest 2]: doesn't seem to happen. Or if it does it. But I mean, I'll just draw your attention.
[Guest 2]: I mean, most the thing that I read by a politician most recently, was because I've been looking
[Guest 2]: at the crisis or thinking about the crisis in Ukraine. And it's actually Vladimir Putin's
[Guest 2]: note article on I think it's like a three or four page article actually on how the Russians
[Guest 2]: and Ukrainians are one people where he lays out his sort of grand vision and his ideas
[Guest 2]: about Ukraine, and Russia. And so, you know, thinking, thinking along those lines, substantial
[Guest 2]: sort of substantive intellectual output will still be in in that form. And if that isn't
[Guest 2]: coming out from politicians, I think we we kind of need to need to stop and have a look
[Guest 2]: and think about it. Because that means that they don't see that sort of substantial intellectual
[Guest 2]: output as necessary. Not, it doesn't mean that they have no ideas, but it just means
[Guest 2]: that they don't seem to think that those ideas either need to be explained in detail, or
[Guest 2]: that anybody else needs that sort of substantial intellectual engagement. So it's very much
[Guest 2]: either a one way sort of street where someone expounds just on the ideas in the spoken form,
[Guest 2]: or if there's engagement, then it's kind of dumbed down to these 280 character tweets
[Amit Varma]: and replies.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the points you made is something I keep stressing in my in the writing classes
[Amit Varma]: I conduct, as well that, you know, the more you write in a clear way, the better your
[Amit Varma]: thinking will be, you know, all the holes in your arguments and in your narratives are
[Amit Varma]: immediately visible to you. And you know, clear writing leads to clear thinking. And
[Amit Varma]: I think it might just be one of the tragedies of our times and something that degrades the
[Amit Varma]: discourse in the sense that there's not enough of that happening. Most of the discourse is
[Amit Varma]: 280 character tweets, sometimes the IT cell sending something out on your behalf, most
[Amit Varma]: of the conversations that we have is, you know, people talking at each other instead
[Amit Varma]: of to each other, which is in fact, you know, a phrase that pops up in the in this book
[Amit Varma]: as well, when Nehru and Jinnah are, you know, having their exchange. So let's, let's kind
[Amit Varma]: of get back to that linear narrative, which will eventually bring us to this wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book, which is, at what point do you guys then get together and decide to write this
[Amit Varma]: book jointly? Like, what are the things that you find interesting in this subject? Like,
[Amit Varma]: at one level, obviously, you're interested in intellectual history, Tripudaman's already,
[Amit Varma]: you know, written 16 stormy days on the First Amendment, which is, you know, the last section
[Amit Varma]: of this book, but what prompts you to do this aspect? And like, it really feels to me that
[Amit Varma]: it's a wonderful book. And it almost feels as if it is a part of a larger kind of project.
[Amit Varma]: And at one level, I guess, of course, it is a larger lifelong project of just understanding
[Amit Varma]: intellectual history, understanding the world. But what kind of led you guys to it? And what
[Amit Varma]: made you think that you should do this, you know, together as it were?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, happy to go first in that question. So my PhD project was, it's now forthcoming
[Guest 1]: in a book called Law and Muslim Political Thought in Late Colonial North India. And
[Guest 1]: in that project, I mainly looked at, as the title says, Muslim political thought. Now,
[Guest 1]: Nehru featured in many of the chapters as a sort of side character. But he had these
[Guest 1]: very, very exciting conversations with some of the main characters that I was looking
[Guest 1]: at. And the main characters, of course, as you can glean from the book, are Muhammad
[Guest 1]: Ali Jinnah, Muhammad Iqbal, etc. So when I came from this experience and this exposure
[Guest 1]: to Nehru, and Tripu Dhaman, of course, had written his book, 60 Stormy Days, and had
[Guest 1]: moved into the post-independence sort of era, it was clear to us that, you know, if we were
[Guest 1]: to do a project, it would be kind of cool, because we could juxtapose Nehru and his debates
[Guest 1]: that he had with the Muslims. And the Muslim question was one of the biggest questions
[Guest 1]: that had to be answered in order to acquire independence. And we can move on and, you
[Guest 1]: know, sort of do something post-independence. And it was Tripu Dhaman who really suggested
[Guest 1]: the book. I was deep down writing my second at that point, which is on blasphemy, and
[Guest 1]: the role of blasphemy, particularly for law in Pakistan. And he suggested that we should
[Guest 1]: come together and sort of write a nice introductory volume that would allow people to directly
[Guest 1]: engage with history without any gatekeepers who are sort of trying to tell them what to
[Guest 1]: think, but just to say that this is the sort of conversation that people were having about
[Guest 1]: 100 years ago. And we can still not just understand it, but we can still make sense of what their
[Guest 1]: main motivations were, simply by reading some selected few letters. That's what really drove
[Amit Varma]: us into this project.
[Amit Varma]: I'm guessing a lot of the research for this effort was stuff that was already done for
[Amit Varma]: your other books. And by the way, I love the format of letting their voices speak for each
[Amit Varma]: other with an introductory essay in each of the sections, because, you know, that kind
[Amit Varma]: of really works for me. Because otherwise, whenever you read a work of history, at a
[Amit Varma]: meta level, every reader is also confronting the question of what are the biases or what
[Amit Varma]: are the angles here, and so on and so forth. And here, you don't really have to account
[Amit Varma]: for that when you're reading the words directly. And of course, you know, what you choose or
[Amit Varma]: somebody's words is also another way that comes into play. But I just found the book,
[Amit Varma]: you know, extremely rich in that way. So question for both of you. I can't remember if I asked
[Amit Varma]: to put them on this the last time we recorded, but something I'm really kind of fascinated
[Amit Varma]: by and I ask all my guests, especially my historian guests, which is what kind of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: management systems do you then use? Because part of the nature of what you do is just
[Amit Varma]: reading a lot, like every day, you're obviously, you know, reading tons, engaging with ideas,
[Amit Varma]: you know, categorizing ideas and events and all of that building narratives, building
[Amit Varma]: narratives, again, breaking down old narratives, what what kind of knowledge management systems
[Amit Varma]: do you kind of use to sort of keep track of all of those things?
[Guest 2]: I'm actually very old fashioned when it comes to my way of working. So I actually make handwritten
[Guest 2]: notes. And I found that the best way of retaining and retaining information. And so I make handwritten
[Guest 2]: notes on on works that I read that are relevant to my research, etc. And then I sort of file
[Guest 2]: them, keep them in folders and file them away. So I have, I have very old fashioned ways
[Guest 2]: of doing things. And when I write, I kind of write, I type by hand, and then I like,
[Guest 2]: you know, to insert footnote and insert a footnote. So I actually don't use, I try to
[Guest 2]: minimize the use of technology when it comes to something like this. And I found writing,
[Guest 2]: particularly writing by hand, helps me kind of retain information a lot better. So that,
[Guest 2]: for me, that's kind of the go to way of, of really, of really kind of deeply engaging
[Guest 2]: with with a piece of writing. How we went into this book was, you know, just to just
[Guest 2]: a quick rundown for me was that we wanted to, we wanted to collaborate, we wanted to
[Guest 2]: work on a project together. And we have, because we shared this sort of similar interest in,
[Guest 2]: in that period in history, we we decided Nehru would be a good way of bridging both our interests,
[Guest 2]: and looking at that period, that period in Indian history. And this book really allows
[Guest 2]: us to do that. And we wanted to very much also speak to the present moment. So we selected
[Guest 2]: those debates that were not only hugely consequential at the time, but in a way are still very much
[Guest 2]: alive around us. And that really narrowed everything, everything down. And it was it
[Guest 2]: was that way, great to collaborate with Adil, because we, we share a good working relationship,
[Guest 2]: and we've been friends since, since our time at Cambridge. So I think that that really
[Guest 2]: made for a good book. And as you mentioned, we very much wanted, the book is an invitation
[Guest 2]: really to everyone to engage with, with these conversations. So we wanted to mainly provide
[Guest 2]: us as we write in the introduction, intellectual scaffolding, rather than a kind of psychographic
[Guest 2]: portrait of the protagonist. And hopefully, we've been we've been able to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Adil, what about your sort of knowledge management systems? Because more and more, what I find
[Amit Varma]: myself using for everything that I do is something called Rome research, which is based on an
[Amit Varma]: old German system of Zettelkasten. And, you know, a side question that, you know, since
[Amit Varma]: it's occurred, I might as well ask it is that there's a certain kind of essentialism, which
[Amit Varma]: is of course, perhaps mainly flawed, but there might be a germ of truth to it when people
[Amit Varma]: talk about how different languages and different cultures have certain characteristics that
[Amit Varma]: affect everything that those people kind of do. And Germans are known for being so methodical
[Amit Varma]: and logical and rational and the best builders of machines and all of that. And do you find
[Amit Varma]: that you know, there are maybe traces of that and that you've imbibed from your education
[Amit Varma]: there and in the way that you look at the world and adding to that, of course, is that
[Amit Varma]: law itself is inherently a little bit like that. So what's your response?
[Guest 1]: Just going into it, maybe, I mean, I can understand that Rippadaman, of course, writes things
[Guest 1]: down because he has excellent penmanship. My penmanship is horrible. So I remember in
[Guest 1]: the fifth grade when one of my teachers said, so he returned one of my one of the papers
[Guest 1]: that I've written one of the exams and then said that it reads like you've, you would
[Guest 1]: have tied a pen to the tail of a rabbit and chased it over this paper. So I still remember
[Guest 1]: that metaphor because it's very, very vivid. And for me, it was always clear that I had
[Guest 1]: to take notes digitally. And that's been the case ever since. So I type out everything,
[Guest 1]: my citations and my books and my papers that I need neatly categorized in Mendeley, maybe
[Guest 1]: according to the old Germanic tradition that Nicholas Luhmann perhaps perfected. You should
[Guest 1]: type in Nicholas Luhmann in Google when you have the time. He was a big sociologist who
[Guest 1]: was famous for having cards, little cards on which he wrote everything, but he filled
[Guest 1]: up rooms with those cards. So you see him in the middle of the room, just being overwhelmed
[Guest 1]: by his Karteikasten, as they were called, and they're everywhere. Possibly the most
[Guest 1]: famous pictures of his are within those rooms. I think that there may be something Germanic
[Guest 1]: to it, but I also just think that it's a neat way of sort of ordering things because I tend
[Guest 1]: to lose papers. I tend to not be very good to sort of categorizing them. Whereas when
[Guest 1]: it is digital, it feels a lot more natural to me because I can actually clean up things
[Guest 1]: and have them in front of me. So that has been my method of choice. And it's worked
[Guest 1]: very well. I also tend to use for the citations, it makes it so much easier if you go back
[Guest 1]: and then you have full word search, which is perhaps the best invention that technology
[Guest 1]: has sort of brought over. So instead of having to, you know, go back and reading a book in
[Guest 1]: its totality, if you know the keyword, you can immediately jump to the relevant pages.
[Guest 1]: And I think it's a help to spread up the publication cycle of academics so they can write much,
[Guest 1]: much faster than they were able to in earlier times.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of technology and full word search, it reminds me that this is the second episode
[Amit Varma]: in a row that I'm recording where an identical thing has happened to me, which is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, while I take notes, I also copy paste a lot of quotes, you know, under each category
[Amit Varma]: and under each point that I'm making. And for like the second recording in a row, Kindle
[Amit Varma]: told me that I have exceeded the publisher's limit of how much I can copy, which is whatever
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, and for my last episode, I just immediately went and I downloaded a
[Amit Varma]: pirated copy and I used that. And for this, luckily, your publishers will send me a PDF.
[Amit Varma]: So that wasn't an issue. So much for technology. You know, so before we get to the book, which
[Amit Varma]: I'm so excited to talk about, a final question, which is triggered by what Tripudaman said
[Amit Varma]: about how you wanted this book to be an invitation to engage. And that's one, it's a lovely way
[Amit Varma]: of looking at it. And while it's getting more and more possible in modern times, how far
[Amit Varma]: away is it from happening in a much greater sense? For example, you know, if I read these
[Amit Varma]: letters and I say, shit, I want to read all of Nehru's letters now, you know, is there
[Amit Varma]: a way for me to do that? Like, I know the collected works of Gandhi are, of course,
[Amit Varma]: available in 100 volumes, which are online, so I can read them online. But otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: the ideal way one would like to see the world ordered is that you don't have gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: to this knowledge at all, that everything is just available online, I can look at Jinnah's
[Amit Varma]: letters, Nehru's letters, I can go through all of them. So I don't need other interpreters
[Amit Varma]: of this material alone, I can, you know, dive into it myself and kind of look, look at it.
[Amit Varma]: So one, how far are we from that happening? Are there barriers to it, which will make
[Amit Varma]: sure it never happens, for example. And two, would you say that, you know, just as in other
[Amit Varma]: fields, you know, gatekeepers are kind of dissolving gradually, you know, today, anybody
[Amit Varma]: can be an artist or a filmmaker or a writer without necessarily having to go to intermediaries,
[Amit Varma]: you have the tools of production, you can directly reach your audiences? Is there something
[Amit Varma]: like that, that can eventually one day happen in academics? So if somebody says, I want
[Amit Varma]: to write a book on ideas, and I want to, you know, use all of this great material, that
[Amit Varma]: they don't necessarily have to be fortunate enough to be able to go to the right colleges
[Amit Varma]: and find their way to Cambridge, where they are, you know, lucky to find themselves with
[Amit Varma]: stimulating people like you guys did?
[Guest 1]: The first part is a copyright question, you know, the lawyer in me has awakened. I just
[Guest 1]: want to jump into and take that first. The truth is really depends on the copyright laws
[Guest 1]: in your country. So most countries will have, you would have open access to the letters
[Guest 1]: of both Jinnah and Nehru, and many other people, especially stuff that has been published in
[Guest 1]: the 40s and 50s. So therefore, going to places like archive.org, going to places like Google
[Guest 1]: Books has been very, very good at digitizing and putting up stuff that will allow you to
[Guest 1]: access, in fact, a majority, not all of them, because some of them were not included in
[Guest 1]: the first volumes, because they took them out, but the vast majority of things. So there's
[Guest 1]: no longer gatekeepers who can keep you from, you know, the sources of knowledge, as it
[Guest 1]: were. And I don't really think that there was ever a time where good history was monopolized
[Guest 1]: at history faculties, or where good legal thinking was monopolized at law faculties.
[Guest 1]: So therefore, I would say that, yes, whereas there have been like institutional gatekeepers,
[Guest 1]: particularly, maybe in the golden age of academic degrees, where people were really marveling
[Guest 1]: over your university education, it was only the latter part of the 20th century. For the
[Guest 1]: rest of the time, it wasn't really like the big requirement for you if you wanted to put
[Guest 1]: your ideas into the public sphere. So I do think that today, as always, there can be
[Guest 1]: amazing history that is written by people who are not properly trained, as long as they
[Guest 1]: have the ability to digest large amounts of information and present them in a fair manner,
[Guest 1]: which many of them do. So some of the favorite people of mine, who have written past and
[Guest 1]: present were not academics. So I mentioned initially, when I was talking about like the
[Guest 1]: favorite people that I have in the English language, were people who were travel writers,
[Guest 1]: like journalists like Emily Hahn, who were not academically trained at a graduate level.
[Guest 1]: And they wrote some of the most beautiful prose, and they summarized developments, both
[Guest 1]: historically and contemporary, that they were experiencing in faraway places like the international
[Guest 1]: settlement in Shanghai in the 1920s and 30s. So all of that cool stuff has always been
[Guest 1]: happening and it continues to happen. So if anybody wants to sort of take these letters
[Guest 1]: or other letters and you know, sort of write their history, then I very much encourage
[Guest 1]: them because there are no barriers now itself. Publishing, of course, it's led to the flood
[Guest 1]: of books. And then it becomes difficult again, in order to create a type of readership. But
[Guest 1]: I do think if social media is used in a responsible manner, then one can create one's own sort
[Guest 1]: of one's own audience and cultivate that and you know, sort of write.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and in fact, India's best known historian Ramchandra Guha wasn't trained in history
[Amit Varma]: at all. I think people within academic history circles still resent him a little bit for
[Amit Varma]: that. It's kind of interesting. And a couple of the books on Nehru I quickly skimmed over
[Amit Varma]: recently before this episode were by Shashi Tharoor and M.J. Akbar and they again aren't
[Amit Varma]: trained historians. I mean, of course, it's all secondary sources and whatever. But still,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you can take that historical material and, you know, build your narrative and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. Our final question, I promise that would be the final question before we go to
[Amit Varma]: the book. But a final question that occurs to me is that in the process of writing, what
[Amit Varma]: does one do about writing voice? Like writers often tend to have completely different voices.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the two of you are writing this. So do you make a decision that only one of
[Amit Varma]: you write so you have a uniform voice? But of course, I mean, the content is this thing
[Amit Varma]: or do you find some kind of medium ground? Like, I did an episode with Vijay Kelkar and
[Amit Varma]: Ajay Shah who wrote In Service of the Republic. And the moment I read two pages, it was immediate
[Amit Varma]: that you know, the whole book is written in a sense by Ajay, but obviously, it's the ideas
[Amit Varma]: of both of them. And that's a conscious decision they made. So that it's just one person's
[Amit Varma]: voice and Ajay is a writer with enormous clarity. So one, how did you guys get past that? And
[Amit Varma]: two, respectively, what were your writing models? You know, who were the writers you
[Amit Varma]: kind of look up to? Like Adil, you mentioned these travel writers, obviously, but in terms
[Amit Varma]: of doing a specific kind of work that you're doing, not just for this book, but even, you
[Amit Varma]: know, your other work, who are the kind of models you look at over a period of time and
[Amit Varma]: say that, okay, I want to write like this?
[Amit Varma]: Can I jump in first? Okay, so I would say that in order to develop one's own voice,
[Guest 1]: which, you know, is possibly the most difficult thing. For me, the process has been that I
[Guest 1]: was, for the longest time, I was trying to copy voices of people that I really admired.
[Guest 1]: And those people are not really part of the sort of conventional canon, but I still consider
[Guest 1]: them to be like the greatest of writers of their time. And even today, the first one
[Guest 1]: that I would name is somebody like, not somebody like, but William Hazlett. I don't know if
[Guest 1]: you've heard of him.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, of course.
[Guest 1]: So he was part of the early romantic movement, but kept himself at a distance from both Wordsworth
[Guest 1]: and Coleridge. He was living in London. So this is late 18th century London, which is
[Guest 1]: becoming modern, it's becoming urbanized. And at the same time, people are just taking,
[Guest 1]: or many of the writers are just taking it for granted or trying to find an escape, which
[Guest 1]: is like this romantic idea of, you know, going back to nature, going back to other things.
[Guest 1]: And what he does is he just writes about everyday life in a way that is trying to capture the
[Guest 1]: anomaly of what is happening around him. And his voice, I think I've yet to come across
[Guest 1]: a writer who captures it in the same type of brilliance. The other thing that I've always
[Guest 1]: admired about him is that from the earliest time, he's enamored by Napoleon. Now, this
[Guest 1]: is not like a specific trait to William Hazlett. This is a trait that many others had as well.
[Guest 1]: So even somebody like Hegel in Germany was excited when Napoleon conquered Prussia in
[Guest 1]: 1806. And, you know, Hegel ran to Jena in order to see what he called the world soul
[Guest 1]: on the horseback, to see Napoleon riding by the Weltseele zu Pferd. But what William Hazlett
[Guest 1]: does is that he's trying to write a biography of Napoleon throughout his life. And he manages
[Guest 1]: to write it only towards the end of his life. And he finally publishes it in four volumes.
[Guest 1]: And it is the opposite of a success. He bankrupts the publisher. So his publisher is bankrupted
[Guest 1]: by, you know, his writing. And it's just so fitting because everything else that he does
[Guest 1]: that he considers like a side project and, you know, sort of a newspaper column that
[Guest 1]: he writes about Indian jugglers who've come to London in order to perform. All of these
[Guest 1]: stories are amazing. And then one reads the Napoleon books and one just goes like, wow,
[Guest 1]: it was the impossibility of writing, of writing those books that allowed him to produce possibly
[Guest 1]: the most magnificent writing. And once he did what he always intended to do, he produced
[Guest 1]: a work that was good, but not to the same extent as his other works were. So I do think
[Guest 1]: that one, at least for me, it was trying to copy the voice of these people. And then finally,
[Guest 1]: you know, one gradually develops one's own voice. Now, the part is that Tripudaman and
[Guest 1]: I have a similar writing style in the sense that we took a different turn at the post-modernism
[Guest 1]: junction, which was the turn towards writing with clarity and trying to express in the
[Guest 1]: limited ways that we are, that it is possible in the clearest language. And I think that
[Guest 1]: led to both of us writing in a similar, not in the same way. I don't think that's ever
[Guest 1]: possible, but in a similar way. But we, you know, still write the individual sections
[Guest 1]: by ourselves and then have the other person sort of go over them. And, you know, we both,
[Guest 1]: like at least I very much trust Tripudaman's writing. So I'm more than happy to adopt the
[Guest 1]: changes that he sort of gives to me.
[Amit Varma]: And before I turn to Tripudaman for his, you know, his writing idols, you, before you started
[Amit Varma]: on Hazlitt, you said there were a number of people who you admire greatly. So tell me
[Amit Varma]: a bit about some of the others.
[Guest 1]: So the second one is a German philosopher. He's rather neglected because he was the last
[Guest 1]: one of the German idealist tradition. And funny enough, this morning, I was reading
[Guest 1]: on the Economist Daily app that one of his descendants, the descendants of his cousin,
[Guest 1]: I should say, bringing up a case to the Supreme Court of the United States that has the entire
[Guest 1]: art world trembling. The name of the philosopher is Ernst Kassirer, liberal guy, German Jew,
[Guest 1]: had to flee Germany when the Nazi party came to power, taught briefly at Yale, then went
[Guest 1]: to Columbia for a bit and wrote mainly on Kant, Immanuel Kant, that was his subject.
[Guest 1]: But he wrote topics about human nature, about the mythology of the state. So The Myth of
[Guest 1]: the State is possibly his most famous work that is known in the English speaking world.
[Guest 1]: He has a book called The Symbolic Philosophy. So he was really into symbolisms and what
[Guest 1]: they and what they and what they meant. And he, despite being shunned when Germany philosophy
[Guest 1]: took the turn to Heidegger, to Martin Heidegger, who was his big opponent, there was two interpretations
[Guest 1]: of Kant, essentially, one was the Heideggerian, one was the Kassirer. And, you know, Kassirer,
[Guest 1]: German philosophers at the time thought was too boring and old and conventional. So they
[Guest 1]: went with Heidegger, but his writings are crystal clear. They really encapsulate 200
[Guest 1]: years of the finest German Jewish thoughts that one can imagine. And I'm kind of sad
[Guest 1]: that he hasn't received any type of revival, despite all of his works being in the in the
[Guest 1]: philosophical domain, and people are not working on him. And I'm not even standing in the tradition
[Guest 1]: of the type of liberal internationalism that he was promoting. I still find him to be one
[Guest 1]: of the most intellectually honest writers of his time. And the case at the Supreme Court,
[Guest 1]: just to sort of conclude this entire story is about a picture. And the picture was bought
[Guest 1]: in 19, in the early 20th century. And in 1926, it was inherited by a woman who later had
[Guest 1]: to sell it to the Nazis in order to leave. So in order to get the exit visa, the Nazi
[Guest 1]: officials said that you have to sell us this work of Camille Pissarro, an impressionist,
[Guest 1]: late 19th century French impressionist. And he, you know, painted this view of this road in Paris.
[Guest 1]: So she sold that picture for pittance, got the ticket out, went to the UK, where her husband,
[Guest 1]: her new husband, so this is no longer the cousin of Ernst Kassirer, the philosopher that I was
[Guest 1]: talking about, but this is a guy called Otto Neubauer. So he had gotten a professorship
[Guest 1]: there. So they moved to Oxford later on, they moved to the United States, they always try,
[Guest 1]: she always tries to get the Pissarro back. And in order to do that, she filed a claim in Germany
[Guest 1]: with the US military in order to get stolen or lost arts returned. And her art piece is not found.
[Guest 1]: But in the meantime, somebody had smuggled it back to the United States and sold it
[Guest 1]: there to a museum. Later on, it's acquired by the Thyssen Foundation, who sells it to the Spanish
[Guest 1]: Crown. Now the painting is in Madrid, and they are trying to get it back because they say that
[Guest 1]: it was taken away from us, and we should be allowed to claim it. Now, if that Supreme Court decision
[Guest 1]: goes in favour of the Kassirers, then that would mean that every single piece of art where you
[Guest 1]: can't prove that you've acted in good faith, which is quite tough to do, would or could technically
[Guest 1]: be returned to the original owner. So that would shake up entire collections, entire museums. I
[Guest 1]: don't, I mean, it's hard to speculate of where the Supreme Court is going to go with this.
[Guest 1]: But it's definitely going to be one of the most exciting cases in this year.
[Amit Varma]: What a story that would be the journey of that painting would just make for an incredible book,
[Amit Varma]: right? There's so many different stands to it. And, and I can imagine people, some people,
[Amit Varma]: some nationalists listening to this might say that I hope the Supreme Court judgment,
[Amit Varma]: you know, gives the painting back, we will then ask for the Koh-i-Noor back.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I'll come at both of you for the end of the episode for more reading recommendations,
[Amit Varma]: because I have a feeling that Adil will get more out of you. But Tripudaman, before we kind of go
[Amit Varma]: to the break, when you embarked upon your writing journey, the previous book, this one, the one
[Amit Varma]: before that, you know, who are the writers you've kind of admired and thought, huh, I want to be
[Guest 2]: able to write like that, and so on. So I think, in terms of history writing, the writer that I
[Guest 2]: admire the most, at the moment, would probably be someone like William Dalrymple. Because
[Guest 2]: here's someone who can, who essentially is able to transcend this distinction between
[Guest 2]: travel writing, history, politics, with, you know, with ease, he can, he's able to evoke
[Guest 2]: the atmosphere and feelings of 18th and 19th century India in a way that almost no one else
[Guest 2]: can. And that, I remember, you know, the first time I read one of his history books, I think
[Guest 2]: the first one I read was The Last Mughal or something. And it kind of blew me away. Because
[Guest 2]: here's someone writing actually mainly about the siege of Delhi, and then the trial of Bahadur
[Guest 2]: Shah Zafar. But he makes it so exciting, actually. And I have worked on, you know, on that subject
[Guest 2]: for my PhD and my first book. And, you know, most of the writing that I read, nothing actually that
[Guest 2]: I read came anywhere close to being as interesting and as exciting as something written by Dalrymple.
[Guest 2]: So Dalrymple, I really, really admire for his ability to evoke the atmosphere about the time
[Guest 2]: and place that he's writing about. And that's something that, you know, I always kind of really,
[Guest 2]: really kept in mind. And then I've also really admired theorists who are able to
[Guest 2]: write with clarity, who are able to really put forward complex ideas and make them intelligible
[Guest 2]: to people who, you know, like me, are not haven't, you know, come from a background in law or
[Guest 2]: political theory. And for that, I've really admired people, like someone like Zygmunt
[Guest 2]: Baumann, for example, who is a very famous, actually was, he sadly died a few years ago,
[Guest 2]: sociologist who wrote on modernity. And, you know, his writings, again,
[Guest 2]: they deal with very, very complex subjects, but he's able to simplify it to an extent where,
[Guest 2]: for me, it was always like, I agree with a lot of his ideas, and my own ideas are very similar,
[Guest 2]: but they were always garbled. In a way, you know, reading his books was like, you know,
[Guest 2]: you read and you go, aha, that is what actually I was thinking. And here's someone who's able to
[Guest 2]: make sense of it for me. So that's another one. And I think most of my writing kind of
[Guest 2]: tries to straddle both of those worlds, in a way. So I would say those are two big influences. And
[Guest 2]: others I might add, I really like people like Barry Anderson, again, is the first time I read,
[Guest 2]: when I read Barry Anderson's essays, I was, it was very early on in my sort of academic and
[Guest 2]: intellectual journey. I think it was when he wrote these essays on there, it was around 2012 or
[Guest 2]: something. And it was the first time where I realized, I was like, yeah, actually, you know,
[Guest 2]: you can write in those terms, you can write something that's, you know, very critical,
[Guest 2]: very scathing, without necessarily making it obnoxious. It's still, you know, something that
[Guest 2]: you would read and you would engage with. And it's an engagement that is fruitful, and that gives you
[Guest 2]: something. So I think those are quite three kind of pretty big, big influences on my writing.
[Guest 2]: Apart from that, you know, I've read a lot, and I've always very been drawn to kind of very
[Guest 2]: fluid writing styles. And I do, I think that kind of comes across in my own writing. I think that's
[Guest 2]: made it easy to work with Adil as well, because as he said, we both have similar sort of influences
[Guest 2]: on our writing, we've kind of missed the turn towards post modernism and post colonialism.
[Guest 2]: For both of us, the aim of our writing is to make things clearer, not to make it more obscure,
[Guest 2]: or not to necessarily make it more convoluted than it needs to be. And so that that kind of
[Guest 2]: really brings us to one page, and each of us is happy to let the other read their stuff and edit
[Guest 2]: it and change it around. So by and large, our writing kind of fits together. And the way that's
[Guest 2]: how we worked on the chapters in this book as well. You know, Adil took the ones on Iqbal and
[Guest 2]: Jinnah, and I took the ones on Patel and Mukherjee. But we were also very happy to then send it to the
[Guest 2]: other person and say, look, you know, why don't you edit change it as as you see fit, that kind
[Guest 2]: of working relationship really, really helped bring the book together. In that way, our voices
[Guest 2]: are similar. And it also helps that we kind of have broad agreement on the ideas as well. So we
[Guest 2]: don't disagree on that much, which would would, you know, often makes me makes it hard, hard,
[Guest 2]: hard to write or to collaborate. And yeah, all of that is to our advantage.
[Amit Varma]: Marvelous. Let's take a quick commercial break. And when we get back, we'll you know,
[Amit Varma]: dive straight into Nehru. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are
[Amit Varma]: that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003
[Amit Varma]: and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced to
[Amit Varma]: think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in
[Amit Varma]: my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I
[Amit Varma]: will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover
[Amit Varma]: in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and
[Amit Varma]: subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in
[Amit Varma]: your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: newsletter at indiancut.substack.com Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Like I recorded a couple of episodes on Mahatma Gandhi with Ram Guha and
[Amit Varma]: I've kind of been a minor Gandhi buff in terms of reading a lot by him. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: a man contains multitudes. But one of the things that you realize about Gandhi is that his influences
[Amit Varma]: are very different from any of the other Indian freedom fighters in the sense he's not reading
[Amit Varma]: the British liberals and Milne and Bentham and all of that. But instead, you know, he's, he's
[Amit Varma]: reading Ruskin on the importance of village life, which is where he gets those views from even
[Amit Varma]: though as you know, Guha points out, he's not spending any time in a village until that point.
[Amit Varma]: And he's, you know, influenced by later Tolstoy, which is all this, you know, this vague spirituality
[Amit Varma]: kind of stuff. And looking at Nehru, you know, you see one that he's got a very privileged
[Amit Varma]: background to he's, you know, he's been to good public schools in England, he's got a great
[Amit Varma]: education, but everywhere in his education, he's remarked upon as someone who hasn't brought any
[Amit Varma]: attention upon himself never showed signs that he would do much. And his intellectual influences
[Amit Varma]: in that way, are of the kind that you can almost predict what he would do next, for example,
[Amit Varma]: Harald Lasky being a big influence on him. And from that, you can talk about the post
[Amit Varma]: independent direction India took and that kind of this kind of thinking on economics and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all of that. So what is your sense of this? Like in on the one hand, you can see that he's a very
[Amit Varma]: well read man, he is quoting things from memory when he's sitting in prison, he has deep knowledge
[Amit Varma]: on a variety of subjects. But at the same time, there are these strange kind of skews, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not as noticeable as say, in the case of Gandhi, who in Hind Swaraj, which was written when he was
[Amit Varma]: in his 40s, you know, rants against railways and doctors and modernity in general. So what is your
[Amit Varma]: sense of that? Like, does a person become who he is, because there are certain inherent parts to
[Amit Varma]: that person's personality? Or that do circumstances really make a big difference? And I know it's a
[Amit Varma]: combination of both. And the question also arises, because in the case of someone like Jinnah,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that contingency played a huge part that, you know, circa 1918, he's a guy who's going
[Amit Varma]: to take over the Congress next, you know, Tilak is dead, Gokhale and Feroz Shah Mehta died recently,
[Amit Varma]: he is the last standing great moderate along with Muthilal Nehru, he's going to lead the party.
[Amit Varma]: 1920 comes, Gandhi takes over the party with what Jinnah regards, I think, correctly as an
[Amit Varma]: incoherent sort of association with the Khilafat movement. And then Jinnah goes off into this
[Amit Varma]: other direction. And of course, we'll talk much more about Jinnah later. But it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: contingency played such a huge role in that you have a little bit of a counterfactual and say,
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi doesn't even appear on the scene. And Jinnah is a different person, and he's still in
[Amit Varma]: the Congress. So what is your sense when you look at Nehru, when you look at characters of that time,
[Amit Varma]: that one, you have a limited pool of people that you're really picking from, because very few people
[Amit Varma]: have the kind of privilege that Nehru did to have that kind of education, did to Jinnah in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So sorry, it's a bit of a long winded question, but you get the drift.
[Guest 2]: No, true, true, true. Nehru had a very privileged upbringing, he had a very
[Guest 2]: privileged education, he went to Harrow, he went to Cambridge. You're right that he,
[Guest 2]: many people do disparagingly say that he showed no promise, you know, Barry Anderson very famously
[Guest 2]: writes, he got, you know, he had a third class degree from Cambridge, and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: And he never made much of a success for himself as a lawyer either. But Nehru was, I mean, Nehru
[Guest 2]: had a great aesthetic, you know, sensibility, he was interested in literature, he was widely read,
[Guest 2]: he developed a very wide range of interests as well. So you know, he, he had some preconceived
[Guest 2]: preconceived notions about India when he came back, etc. But he was also very much willing to,
[Guest 2]: to kind of explore and learn and you'll see these through his debates as well.
[Guest 2]: He is both well informed about stuff and, you know, equally interested in having conversations
[Guest 2]: about those things as well. And you see this, you know, very openly in the conversation that he has
[Guest 2]: with Iqbal, because it's ultimately a conversation about, you know, something that to a kind of
[Guest 2]: cosmopolitan like Nehru, which should be quite parochial, it's about like, Muslim orthodoxy,
[Guest 2]: Muslim, you know, Islamic theology, about which he is neither particularly well informed, or
[Guest 2]: should have any great interest in, but he does enough, you know, that from Almora jail, where
[Guest 2]: he's locked up, he's willing to engage in this kind of quite long dialogue that he has with
[Guest 2]: Iqbal over many months. In terms of the counterfactual that you presented is, is interesting,
[Guest 2]: because you say, if you know, if Gandhi doesn't appear, you know, Jinnah is a whole new man,
[Guest 2]: I think you could also say the same about Nehru. Because if Gandhi doesn't appear, Nehru is also,
[Guest 2]: you know, almost quite certain to have not become the man, the man he did, because the
[Guest 2]: hand of Gandhi behind it, you know, is a weaning. In a sense, Nehru was groomed, almost prepared
[Guest 2]: for the position. All of his political life was really preparation for the top job. His father
[Guest 2]: helped line him up for presidency of the Congress. And Gandhi helped tip him, you know, make his
[Guest 2]: presidency a big success by making him the president at the time. Because, because Moti
[Guest 2]: Lal, etc, had been many people, not just Moti Lal, but many others had been demanding,
[Guest 2]: you know, demanding that Congress go, you know, pass a resolution, raising the demand for complete
[Guest 2]: independence, boon swaraj. And Gandhi kind of demurs and says, initially, he doesn't want it,
[Guest 2]: but then he agrees that if the British don't grant dominion status within a year, then you know,
[Guest 2]: the Congress will demand complete independence. So Nehru is, you know, made president at a time
[Guest 2]: that the Congress will raise the demand for complete independence. And that really kind of
[Guest 2]: makes him into a pivotal figure, because you know, he's the one who raises the
[Guest 2]: Congress flag on 26 January 1930, and raises the demand for complete independence. So Nehru is in
[Guest 2]: a way groomed for the top job by essentially the top people. His intellectual influences are varied.
[Guest 2]: But when he first comes back to India from, from Britain, apart from, you know, you mentioned
[Guest 2]: Lasky, and he is, you know, he does kind of go in that direction. But when he comes to India,
[Guest 2]: he's very much on the lookout for intellectual influences for someone to kind of intellectually
[Guest 2]: explain India to him, he goes, and he, you know, he wants to discover it, but he also really wants
[Guest 2]: to be guided into it. And Gandhi ends up playing that role. And even though Nehru doesn't agree
[Guest 2]: with Gandhi on many things, and he, you know, often doesn't buy into a lot of Gandhi's fads,
[Guest 2]: he very much does look at Gandhi as guiding him into explaining Indian politics in a way. So he,
[Guest 2]: some people would, you know, go a lot further. Again, you know, I mentioned,
[Guest 2]: here I mentioned Perry Anderson, but also someone like Meghnad Desai,
[Guest 2]: you know, people like that will often explain Nehru's relationship with Gandhi to be, you know,
[Guest 2]: almost like a son to a father, where, you know, he's very much looking for someone to,
[Guest 2]: to guide him along, along the political path to explain the political path to him. And so
[Guest 2]: Gandhi's intellectual influence, I think, has always, always been understated. It's,
[Guest 2]: it's overshadowed by the fact that Nehru repudiates Gandhi after independence, once executive power is
[Guest 2]: within his grasp. But he very much understands, he seeks to understand at least India through,
[Guest 2]: through these people around him, because he actually, he doesn't have a sense of organic
[Guest 2]: engagement with, with the real sort of bottom rung in the way that, in the way that many people
[Guest 2]: have. He hasn't lived there. He, you know, he can't speak the language well, initially, when
[Guest 2]: he comes back, his sort of formative influences, all come from outside. And so for him, the
[Guest 2]: engaging in these conversations with mainly with Gandhi, but also with others,
[Guest 2]: is an intellectual exercise that helps him form his own sort of conception
[Guest 2]: of India and of his role, of his role in India.
[Guest 1]: Maybe, maybe I can just add a little bit to what Tripudamal just said. The one thing that I find
[Guest 1]: very fascinating about Nehru is the very idea of how he sees himself almost eternally, even when
[Guest 1]: he's taken hold of the Congress Party post-independence, and there's hardly any
[Guest 1]: opposition. He still sees himself as a student, both of history and of India. And that curiosity
[Guest 1]: really drives him. So he has an openness to ideas that is usually played over by people saying that,
[Guest 1]: oh, no, he learned a little bit of communism while he was in the UK, and then he comes back
[Guest 1]: and tries to oppose it, you know, try to impose it upon the population, regardless of what the cost.
[Guest 1]: So the people who usually take the sort of, take the first from, from Cambridge, those were the
[Guest 1]: people who went back with a specific type of confidence that they were sort of here in order
[Guest 1]: to rule, and they've had the best concepts. So maybe Nehru took away more from his Cambridge
[Guest 1]: diploma than most other people with better degrees or with better grades than him, because he took
[Guest 1]: away the idea that he's going to be a student primarily. And if he remains his curiosity intact,
[Guest 1]: then he can open up to an entire continent that he doesn't have an immediate connection to.
[Guest 1]: And I do think that that sets him apart of many of the other figures that we see in the
[Guest 1]: nationalist moment, many of the other founding fathers. So let's take somebody like Jinnah. So
[Guest 1]: Jinnah, a lot more successful, excellent grades, a lot more successful, you know, he comes back,
[Guest 1]: he's immediately put in the position of, in the imperial courts, he immediately goes into dispute,
[Guest 1]: resolution, he has a law firm, incredibly successful law firm, makes a lot of money. But for
[Guest 1]: Jinnah, he would, at a very deeper level, understand himself as having understood India,
[Guest 1]: mainly through the concepts that he studied, and his success is a proof of that. So he goes and
[Guest 1]: engages with much of the Muslim public in a more dominant way. Whereas Nehru goes to the public
[Guest 1]: as a student and says, I'm going to be, I'm going to be a student and you teach me. And that works
[Guest 1]: out when he encounters somebody like Gandhi, who says that I've been waiting for a pupil, finally,
[Guest 1]: you know, I'm the guru, and I'm going to explain, you know, how I see India and how I see the
[Guest 1]: world. But when Nehru tries to do the same to somebody like Jinnah, Jinnah doesn't really know
[Guest 1]: how to react to that. He just says, like, you want to, you know, what is there to learn. So
[Guest 1]: why don't you just go back and do your homework? I'm not going to be your guide. Like, I'm not
[Guest 1]: going to play the role as a guide in trying to explain my vision of India to you. You should
[Guest 1]: have known that by now. And I do think that I think that Nehru is a very good example of that.
[Guest 1]: He says, I'm not going to play the role as a guide in trying to explain my vision of India to you.
[Guest 1]: You should have known that by now. And I do think that I admire the sort of approach that Nehru
[Guest 1]: takes, because that's what you really want in a leader, somebody who's open to new influences,
[Guest 1]: regardless of what later happens. But I think the basic sort of point that Nehru sort of brings to
[Amit Varma]: the table. I'll move on to a question. But before that, an observation, you know, when Gandhi came
[Amit Varma]: to India from South Africa, he met up with his mentor G.K. Gokhale, whom he had long admired.
[Amit Varma]: They I think first met in 1894. In fact, the first time they met, they took a walk on the lawns of
[Amit Varma]: my alma mater, Ferguson College in Pune. Little bit of trivia. But anyway, so in the mid 1910s,
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi comes back, meets Gokhale. And Gokhale is kind of aghast. He's also read Hind Swaraj. He
[Amit Varma]: doesn't know India yet. So for one year, I don't want you to take part in politics, just go around
[Amit Varma]: the country and immerse yourself in life. And shortly after that, Gokhale dies. And Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: continues his one year journey. And for some reason, he decides not to wear any footwear in
[Amit Varma]: honor of the departed Gokhale. I don't know where that logic came from. So a question that I asked
[Amit Varma]: Ram Guha, and I found his answer very illuminating. The question that I asked him was that Gandhi was
[Amit Varma]: wrong on so many things. And that's partly because of his influences were so limited and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: but he was wrong on so many things like his distrust of railways, of doctors, of modernity,
[Amit Varma]: and this and that and many things. But he was right on the one big thing that really mattered,
[Amit Varma]: at least in my eyes, which is the means being more important than the ends. The whole notion
[Amit Varma]: of nonviolence and satyagraha and whatever, you know, on the big things, he's someone you need to
[Amit Varma]: study and learn from. A lot of the small things he got completely wrong, completely wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So why was that? Ram's answer was that that was because he learned that by doing. Because one
[Amit Varma]: after the other in South Africa, he went on the satyagrahas and they all failed. He had half a
[Amit Varma]: success right at the end, which was enough of a face saver for him to come back. And in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: they all failed in the approximate means. But he really understood that because he learned by doing
[Amit Varma]: the rest of the stuff he didn't know. He just had, you know, random views that he's got from
[Amit Varma]: wherever and the doing made him special. And the doing came from actually going out there among the
[Amit Varma]: people living among them being one of them. So it is resonant to me when you say that Nehru looking
[Amit Varma]: at him as a mentor, he's, you know, been educated abroad comes back wants to understand the country
[Amit Varma]: who is a better person than someone who's actually going out there and living among the people. So
[Amit Varma]: whatever else he teaches you, that's a great approach to pick up. Now, my question is this,
[Amit Varma]: like there is a duality that I see to Nehru. One is, of course, this openness, this curiosity,
[Amit Varma]: this flexibility, you guys talk about it in your book where you speak about how his thinking is
[Amit Varma]: instrumental as much as ideational when you write quote, you know, his engagement with other
[Amit Varma]: political actors was as instrumental as it was ideational, as personal as it was public. If Nehru
[Amit Varma]: the visionary was an idealist, when Nehru the political actor was as much a hard nosed realist,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And of course, there are examples are given the book and elsewhere of how this is true.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the other side of his nature is that in many ways, he seems extremely rigid
[Amit Varma]: and hard nosed to change his mind when he strongly believes in something. The debates with Patel on
[Amit Varma]: China are of course, one example where he's completely wrong and he only realizes it because
[Amit Varma]: something happens in the real world which shows him he is wrong, which for many of the other
[Amit Varma]: abstract debates would not necessarily have happened. There are of course, his famous debates
[Amit Varma]: with Rajaji, maybe you can expound on that in a future book, his famous debates on the free market
[Amit Varma]: with Rajaji, where Nehru's got this association from 1920s onwards that you know, colonialism and
[Amit Varma]: capitalism go together. So therefore, markets are bad and always exploitative and a zero something.
[Amit Varma]: And that's his whole approach and his adherence to that top down thinking his adherence to
[Amit Varma]: social engineering, to the extent that even you know, in that last section where you guys talk
[Amit Varma]: about the First Amendment, Nehru's talking in that eloquent speech, where he tries to get the
[Amit Varma]: First Amendment through and is arguing for it where he talks about how, you know, social objectives
[Amit Varma]: matter, rights don't matter so much, right? So my big question here is that on a big question,
[Amit Varma]: not a small matter of practical exigency, but on a big question, where did Nehru change his mind?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is my reading correct that as far as a big ideological questions are there, not only was he
[Amit Varma]: firm in his head about them, and arrogant that he knew the answers, but he also would not listen to
[Amit Varma]: others like you see this even in the debate in the in the section with Iqbal, for example, where a
[Amit Varma]: debate is happening. And you can see in Iqbal's reply, this kind of patient explaining of the
[Amit Varma]: history and the context of Islam because he feels that Nehru is speaking from a place where he has
[Amit Varma]: no idea what he's talking about at a very surface level, which is the impression I think a reader
[Amit Varma]: would get as well. Similarly, when, you know, Jinnah berates him for being arrogant, because
[Amit Varma]: Nehru is saying there is no communal problem, right? And Jinnah is like, listen, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is you got to be open to that you can't just condescend and say, Oh, you these guys are talking
[Amit Varma]: about a problem, there's no problem. So, you know, is this a view of Nehru you'd largely agree with?
[Amit Varma]: Or would you say that there are big instances where he did change his mind? Where, you know,
[Guest 2]: what would your response be? I think one big issue where a shift is very discernible is
[Guest 2]: Nehru's engagement with Islam, for example, and partition, and, and the kind of violence
[Guest 2]: that is unleashed on partition really does shake him up. So even though it doesn't shake him up
[Guest 2]: enough to change his his kind of views of religion per se, it does really force him in a way to
[Guest 2]: change his, his attitude towards towards Muslims. So he, you can see that he kind of makes an almost
[Guest 2]: 180 degree sort of change from the views that he's expressing when he's talking to Iqbal,
[Guest 2]: to the kind of views that he expounds when the Indian Constitution comes into force and to his
[Guest 2]: and when he kind of crafts, what we now call Indian, Indian secularism, that is very much
[Guest 2]: crafted on the idea that there are sort of separate religious or cultural rights which
[Guest 2]: which need to be defended. And he sort of is at he's sort of very happy to to let those kind of
[Guest 2]: be embedded in the Constitution, and to allow Indian Muslims that space that will that he
[Guest 2]: believes they need in a way to to kind of join join the Indian mainstream. So that is that is
[Guest 2]: one of the kind of big shifts in his thinking that does happen in the others. I guess there
[Guest 2]: are two ways of looking at it. In one way, he is rigid. And his ideas don't, you know, they don't,
[Guest 2]: they don't shift easily. He's also very good, actually, at at most, not necessarily expressing
[Guest 2]: his ideas in very stark terms until he is in a position to make sure that they prevail. And
[Guest 2]: that's one of the reasons why Nehru succeeds in, in kind of staying atop the Congress hierarchy.
[Guest 2]: And someone like Bose fails, is that Nehru never allows himself to be, even though he, you know,
[Guest 2]: he is part of the Congress sort of left, he never allows himself to be placed in a position where
[Guest 2]: he kind of becomes the figurehead of the radicals. Nehru's ideas only really explicate themselves
[Guest 2]: towards the latter part of his career. And that's because he, he is very conscious that he needs to
[Guest 2]: maintain dialogue and engagement with all spectrums of opinion to be able to keep himself aloft. And
[Guest 2]: that kind of, that's what happens to Bose. Bose kind of really loses, he loses essentially to
[Guest 2]: the Congress right. There's the, the idea everyone has is that Gandhi effectively dethrones
[Guest 2]: Bose in 1938, which in a way he does. But it's also a consequence of Bose being unable to maintain
[Guest 2]: working relationships with those on the Congress right, people like Tandon Patel, so on and so
[Guest 2]: forth. And Nehru is actually very adept at doing that. Of course, it helps that he has Gandhi's
[Guest 2]: blessing, but he himself never really positions, you know, when we say that the ideas are, you
[Guest 2]: know, his debates are ideational and instrumental, in a way they are also about positioning himself
[Guest 2]: vis-a-vis his contemporaries and his opponents. And so the big kind of positioning with his
[Guest 2]: opponents, with his colleagues, someone like Patel or Mukherjee only really happens around
[Guest 2]: independence or after. Before independence, the kind of big arguments that happen are with the
[Guest 2]: other side. And there, even though Nehru is not, may not be, you know, completely open to changing
[Guest 2]: his views, he is willing to see how much kind of working ground can be found. At least that's
[Guest 2]: very much the impression that I have. Unfortunately, he's not kind of, he doesn't really engage in
[Guest 2]: enough self-reflection to see where he is inhibiting the kind of appearance of any common
[Guest 2]: working ground, but he is quite earnest in his desire to find it. So that's where, you know,
[Guest 2]: you have to see that this engagement is both ideational and instrumental. So at one level,
[Guest 2]: so at one level, yes, it's a kind of ideological conversation. At another level, it's also a
[Guest 2]: conversation that's very practical there. He's very much a practical politician. He wants,
[Guest 2]: you know, he wants things to be noted down in points to say, okay, well, you know, out of 10
[Guest 2]: points, we have convergence on three, maybe that can, you know, give us space to work out
[Guest 2]: some sort of common working program or something to that extent. So that's very much where he's
[Guest 2]: coming from. And that's also why, you know, I always say there's, you know, there's idealism
[Guest 2]: and there's realism, because it's not just a cerebral exchange. It's also a very practical
[Guest 2]: exchange. And yeah, I think that's really the point that I would make.
[Guest 1]: And perhaps just to add to that, I would say that there's a general shrinkage of the political
[Guest 1]: imagination that comes with the exercise of political power. So I wouldn't sort of single
[Guest 1]: out Nehru and say that, oh, look at Nehru and, you know, why is he so... I mean, if you have
[Guest 1]: political power, and you try to convince other people that you have the best recipe to alleviate
[Guest 1]: poverty, and that's this socialism that you've sort of flashed out, then that's what you're
[Guest 1]: going to do, you're going to come across a lot more rigid. It's no longer this sort of open
[Guest 1]: student type relationship that he had within the in the 20s and 30s. But it comes with political
[Guest 1]: power. And I do think that political power doesn't really lend itself to excellent thinking.
[Guest 1]: So once you carry a specific burden, of course, you do no longer have the time and the attention
[Guest 1]: span to actually focus and you sort of sit down and evaluate all the positions carefully,
[Guest 1]: as you were in a time where political power is wielded by somebody else, the burden of governance
[Guest 1]: is carried by somebody else. Those are the great times of thought. And you see that not just with
[Guest 1]: Nehru, but bringing in my own assessment of the political thought of Indian Muslims in the 19th
[Guest 1]: century, you can really see that once the British take over, Muslim political thought really springs
[Guest 1]: up and they start thinking about, hey, we just lost power. But now we also have a space in which
[Guest 1]: we can think, because when you're ruling, you don't really have those spaces of thought. And
[Guest 1]: I do think that Nehru sort of falls into that category. The other thing that I wanted to remark
[Guest 1]: is that once Nehru sort of identifies poverty as being like this big issue that he tries to
[Guest 1]: get rid of, he really levels all of his intellectual and political capital that he has
[Guest 1]: behind that question. And that could be seen as a sign of sincerity, like whatever else it is. And
[Guest 1]: it has catastrophic consequences for the development of India, as we all know, because
[Guest 1]: it stays arrested into that frame of thinking for much of the 20th century when other countries are
[Guest 1]: sort of taking off. But at least there's some type of sincerity that one can appreciate.
[Amit Varma]: I feel at times it also, you know, and there are instances of that in this book, where
[Amit Varma]: it's also a good way for him to deflect talking about other issues that he does not want to talk
[Amit Varma]: about, like, you know, while talking to Jinnah, he's like, or even Iqbal, you know, at different
[Amit Varma]: points, he'll break into this whole thing of, you know, why are you stuck on the communal question,
[Amit Varma]: religion won't get you out of poverty, we need to think about poverty, starvation, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And it's really a bit of a straw man, because none of those other gentlemen are
[Amit Varma]: saying that we should not do anything about poverty. But it's just a useful way for Nehru
[Amit Varma]: to kind of also deflect away from that. And, yeah, that's really interesting. And one area where he
[Amit Varma]: did change his mind, and I noted this quote down when I came across it in your book is when
[Amit Varma]: he's responding to Jinnah. And of course, like you point out, he's constantly asking Jinnah to
[Amit Varma]: itemize his grievances. And Jinnah is saying, I'm not petitioning you, you meet me in person,
[Amit Varma]: I will tell you. But eventually, he does get a sense of those grievances. And one of them is
[Amit Varma]: personal laws. And in response to that, Nehru writes, quote, as regards protection of culture,
[Amit Varma]: the Congress has declared his willingness to embody this in the fundamental laws of the
[Amit Varma]: Constitution. It has also declared that it does not wish to interfere in any way with the personal
[Amit Varma]: law of any community, stop quote. And of course, what happens in our early years is that Congress
[Amit Varma]: in power and Nehru SPM does interfere with the personal laws of one community, which is a Hindu
[Amit Varma]: community with the Hindu code bill, which is still debated. And the argument against that is that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, you know, if you have to interfere with personal laws, then do it with everyone,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the right to equality, treat everyone equally. Why only us? Is there a sort of
[Amit Varma]: hardening against the Hindu right as the years go by? Or was he, you know, not being entirely
[Amit Varma]: sincere when he wrote these words to Jinnah in the, you know, in the 30s? Or
[Amit Varma]: would he have, you know, changed his mind over a period of time? And if so, why?
[Guest 2]: To start from where Adil just finished, there was, I mean, Walter Crocker, one of his biographers,
[Guest 2]: for example, says, the great majority of Indians always had the feeling and they never really lost
[Guest 2]: that, you know, Nehru was sincere. And this sort of sincerity was very much part and parcel
[Guest 2]: of both of his popularity and of his engagement with people as well. As far as personal laws go,
[Guest 2]: actually, we can say with a large degree of confidence, Nehru was not really interested
[Guest 2]: in religion, he didn't really think it was worth engaging with or it was a category of any
[Guest 2]: importance. And even the kind of cataclysm of partition doesn't really change his mind to that
[Guest 2]: extent. But he does come to appreciate, especially for Indian Muslims, the role that sort of
[Guest 2]: religious and cultural rights play. And he's very conscious of the fact that he has to provide for
[Guest 2]: there to be a secular state, it has to rest on the consent of India's Muslim minority. And he's very
[Guest 2]: much willing to give that space that they really need for them to feel comfortable and safe in the
[Guest 2]: new India he's building. As far as the Hindu right goes, actually, Nehru really despises the Hindu
[Guest 2]: right. Walter Crocker calls it, you know, one of his pet peeves. Actually, he says, Crocker goes as
[Guest 2]: far as saying, you know, Hinduism is one of his pet peeves, along with, you know, poverty and
[Guest 2]: the Maharajas and the feudals and so on and so forth. So Nehru really despises organized religion.
[Guest 2]: And the question of reforming Hindu law is something that's always really there. He backs,
[Guest 2]: he does it to the furthest extent that is possible without jeopardizing his own position. So he goes
[Guest 2]: far, but he again, doesn't go as far as some of the more radical elements wanted or as far as
[Guest 2]: someone like Ambedkar wanted. He doesn't do it for the Muslims for the simple reason that, again,
[Guest 2]: these are all sort of interconnected things. He wants the state to be secular. For the state to
[Guest 2]: be secular, it really has to have a Muslim minority in India's claims to secularism,
[Guest 2]: because everyone knows sociologically, kind of the Indian state and the Congress itself,
[Guest 2]: before it rested on Hindu society. It was only the kind of ironclad backing of the vast majority
[Guest 2]: of Hindus that made the Congress so powerful an organization that it could say to, you know, someone
[Guest 2]: like Jinnah, well, we're not willing to, you know, put all of these sort of concessions that you
[Guest 2]: want towards minority rights, you know, whether it was sort of more power to the provinces or,
[Guest 2]: you know, inclusion of weightage, in terms of representation, and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: So for it very much for the state to be secular, it very much needed a Muslim minority for that
[Guest 2]: Muslim minority to remain in India, it very much needed to be given the space that would,
[Guest 2]: you know, make it feel safe and India comfortable as a whole. And so Nehru was very conscious of
[Guest 2]: that. And he was very conscious of giving them that space. Equally, Nehru also wanted India to
[Guest 2]: have a seat at the high table. He was a global statesman. He had that stature. It's a position
[Guest 2]: that he had. And it's a position that he prized very greatly. And he had that position, because
[Guest 2]: he was a Democrat, because India was a secular state, all of these things went into making Nehru
[Guest 2]: the global statesman. And so those were also points that he that were very much at the back of his
[Guest 2]: mind, that he to kind of retain that position of India as a kind of secular democracy, and, you
[Guest 2]: know, his own position as a global statesman, he needed India to be secular. He needed India's
[Guest 2]: Muslim minority to be content and comfortable. And so he's willing to, in a way, create that space.
[Guest 2]: And that's, that's, that's basically it. It's a very practical question, I'm sure, you know,
[Guest 2]: personally, Nehru really didn't have that much time for Muslim orthodoxy, either, as you see
[Guest 2]: in his conversation with Iqbal. But it's very much a very practical decision that he has to take
[Guest 2]: once, as Adil says, he has to, once he's sitting on in a sort of executive chair, decision making
[Guest 2]: undergoes metamorphosis, we were joking, before we started the interview about how many on the
[Guest 2]: furthest sort of person on the spectrum that you could imagine of the Hindu right, often called
[Guest 2]: Modi, Mulana Modi, sorry, it's, and it's a bit the same thing. Once you're sitting in a kind of,
[Guest 2]: in, in the chair, you, decision making ultimately does tend to involve a number
[Guest 2]: of practical considerations. And that was also the case with Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: And an aside, I mean, you've spoken in the book as well about Nehru's sort of the importance that
[Amit Varma]: he gave his global image. And you know, one reason that Indira Gandhi called off the emergency,
[Amit Varma]: many people say is that she was concerned that the rest of the world would lose respect for her,
[Amit Varma]: the foreign press was writing bad things, she also wanted to be seen as a democrat.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, she was, she thought she would win. So, you know, despite Sanjay Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: misgivings, she called it off and thank God for her delusions. A last general question on Nehru
[Amit Varma]: emerging from what you just said, before we dive into his debates one by one, is that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that he always despised the Hindu right. Now, you know, just looking at the Congress, many of the
[Amit Varma]: tall leaders, if not practically all the tall leaders with a couple of exceptions at that time,
[Amit Varma]: were in a sense, people of the Hindu right within the Congress, you know, whether it's Patel or
[Amit Varma]: Prasad or Malviya or Lal Bahadur Shastri. And there's a very sort of telling demonstration of
[Amit Varma]: that in a book called The Dark Knight, co-authored by Dhirendra Jha, which is about the placing of
[Amit Varma]: the idol in the Babri Masjid in 49 or 50 or sometime like that. And when that was done,
[Amit Varma]: and news went to Nehru, Nehru immediately ordered his people that, you know, get the idol out of
[Amit Varma]: there. And they just refused. I think Pant was CM of UP, Lal Bahadur Shastri was Home Minister of UP,
[Amit Varma]: and they didn't. And the idol stayed there. And you see the repercussions of that in modern times.
[Amit Varma]: And you read narratives like that, it almost seems that in a sense, he was not just a man apart,
[Amit Varma]: but also a man alone, that people believe different things than him. There are, of course,
[Amit Varma]: fascinating counterfactuals of what if someone else had been PM, what if Patel was PM or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Nehru at one point in 1950, when the Bangladesh stuff was happening, you know,
[Amit Varma]: even wanted to quit at one point, threatened to quit at one point. So what if he had done that?
[Amit Varma]: So we don't know those counterfactuals. So would you agree that in a certain sense, he was a man
[Amit Varma]: apart, that what got him there, like as much as he became President of the Congress in 2930,
[Amit Varma]: because of Gandhi's insistence and Gandhi's force, that in a sense, that catapulted him all the way
[Amit Varma]: to the Prime Ministership as well. And, you know, in 1929-30, of course, it generally sort of felt
[Amit Varma]: that Patel was, you know, the popular choice at that point in time, you know, and in your book,
[Amit Varma]: Nehru, in fact, gets angry with Patel, because, you know, why did you talk to this 50 MPs,
[Amit Varma]: and you were apparently criticizing me and Patel explains that, listen, they wanted to meet me once,
[Amit Varma]: they asked me twice, they asked me thrice, I couldn't say no, you get the sense that in the
[Amit Varma]: rank and file of the party, or at least among its MPs, Patel is a popular guy. And Nehru is a man
[Amit Varma]: apart and in a sense, a man alone as well. So what is your sense of this? And how does this then shape
[Amit Varma]: the way that he views his work? Because I would imagine that if you feel alone where you are,
[Amit Varma]: that hey, nobody agrees with me, and all these other tall guys, you know, feel so differently,
[Amit Varma]: they can be self doubt in this case, perhaps it was, you know, a more adversarial attitude. So
[Amit Varma]: what role does all of this play in, you know, Nehru's thinking?
[Guest 2]: No, I think it's very important, actually. Yeah. And again, I talk about Crocker,
[Guest 2]: because Crocker writes about this extensively in his book. Nehru is a man alone, not only,
[Guest 2]: and especially after, you know, he's after Gandhi's death, because Gandhi very much was a
[Guest 2]: figure he could approach for guidance for advice. After Gandhi's death, he really is alone. And
[Guest 2]: that's what Crocker writes, you know, he's a man with really no friends, and his kind of singular
[Guest 2]: focus in life is his work. And by the time that Nehru's prime minister, especially once you get
[Guest 2]: to the latter part of his reign, you know, past 1955, he has no confidence, he has no friends.
[Guest 2]: So in some ways, he's quite a sad sort of figure, sad, old, lonely figure at that point in his life.
[Guest 2]: And I assume that that would kind of really feed into how you think and how you perceive things.
[Guest 2]: He's very isolated, he's very dependent on the few kind of people around him for information.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of them are not really, as you say, as you mentioned, in the case of the Babri Masjid,
[Guest 2]: the appearance of the idols, etc, is that they're not reliable. Nehru had always been
[Guest 2]: a bit of an outlier that way, because the Congress, as I said, sociologically rested
[Guest 2]: on Hinduism. It's very interesting, and it's now become really unfashionable to talk about
[Guest 2]: the growth of Indian nationalism, and the Congress in that way. But the Congress grew
[Guest 2]: very much through an engagement with local politics. And that revolved around, you know,
[Guest 2]: some, you know, temple agitations, or kind of, you know, getting agitations of a contract,
[Guest 2]: small time contracts, once municipal government became a thing. So the Congress organization,
[Guest 2]: the rank and file very much came from those backgrounds. Nehru was unlike any of his
[Guest 2]: colleagues either. And even someone like Patel, even though he had gone and studied in Britain,
[Guest 2]: etc, was not a vain, sophisticated, cosmopolitan man, like Nehru was. And that's part of the reason
[Guest 2]: that made Patel very appealing to the rank and file of the Congress was that he, you know, he
[Guest 2]: was one of them, he was like them, he came from having worked as a lawyer, and, you know, really
[Guest 2]: worked his way up through the Congress hierarchy by being Gandhi's foot soldier doing the admin and
[Guest 2]: organizational work. Nehru, on the other hand, is not really like that. Nehru never really holds a
[Guest 2]: job until he becomes Prime Minister. And he's also more, in a way he appeals to the Indian public
[Guest 2]: over the organization. There's a very revealing lecture that Krishna Menon once gave in Britain,
[Guest 2]: where he spoke about Nehru's kind of way of relaxation, you know, it's, it sounds funny
[Guest 2]: now when you say it, and he says, you know, when Nehru wanted to relax, he, he went and gave a
[Guest 2]: speech to the crowd, because nothing energized him as much as you know, adoring crowds. So Nehru,
[Guest 2]: in that way, was very much a man of the people, and very much the heir to Gandhi's legacy,
[Guest 2]: rather than the kind of man who held, held Congress together. And it's interesting that
[Guest 2]: people somehow assume that Nehru stole the Prime Minister from Patel. Actually, Nehru became Prime
[Guest 2]: Minister because very cleverly after all of these people came out of jail, Azad had been Congress
[Guest 2]: President for, I don't know, five or six years, it was clear that the British were going to leave.
[Guest 2]: Gandhi had Nehru made Congress President because, you know, that that was the that was the top job,
[Guest 2]: that's what would allow him, really, the kind of surest shot for the top job. And it does,
[Guest 2]: Nehru is invited to be the Vice President in Council to the Viceroy in the interim government.
[Guest 2]: And he's invited to be that by virtue of being Congress President. And so it, he doesn't really
[Guest 2]: steal it, he is being lined up for it from, from day one. And Patel always has the possibility of
[Guest 2]: saying no, but he doesn't. And part of it is to, is due to, you know, really his loyalty to Gandhi.
[Guest 2]: But part of it, I think also is that Patel realizes that he's, he doesn't have that kind
[Guest 2]: of charisma and popularity that, that Nehru seems to. Everyone who meets Nehru is charmed by him,
[Guest 2]: everyone kind of sees the effect that he has, you know, on crowds and how the Indian public
[Guest 2]: really adores him. So, you know, he's, there's always, you know, really two sides, two sides
[Guest 2]: of looking at that. But he does make a very isolated figure as, as Prime Minister. And
[Guest 2]: there's no doubt about that, as soon as and, and the more time goes on, he, the more
[Guest 2]: ill informed he gets, as you know, many of his close friends and colleagues pass away,
[Guest 2]: the more isolated and lonely he gets to, to the extent that by the late 50s and early 60s,
[Guest 2]: even people are kind of openly don't think, you know, they openly think he really doesn't have
[Guest 2]: it in him to, to continue as Prime Minister. But it's just by sheer force of personality,
[Guest 2]: because he's Nehru, the man who led the country to independence, that he's still there,
[Guest 2]: and nobody can really dream of, of challenging him.
[Amit Varma]: By the way, just, just a question as an aside, since you mentioned the phrase,
[Amit Varma]: a man who led the country to independence, you know, there is a school of thought that
[Amit Varma]: holds that regardless of the entire freedom struggle, colonialism would have ended anyway,
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't economically feasible, that, you know, the British were just so hammered by the
[Amit Varma]: Second World War that for economic reasons, they would just have left in any case.
[Amit Varma]: So when you say that, oh, Gandhi got us freedom, or Nehru got us freedom, or so and so,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that's a sort of a post facto narrative that is not entirely false,
[Amit Varma]: but also perhaps embellished by the victors. So what is what is your take on that?
[Guest 2]: No, I think you're completely right. I mean, colonialism was going to collapse,
[Guest 2]: but crucially, it was going to end anyway, right from the 1930s, the British had openly declared
[Guest 2]: that actually Dominion status was was the end goal. India was invited as a participant
[Guest 2]: at the discussions that drafted the statutes of Westminster, which gave Dominion status to
[Guest 2]: Australia, New Zealand, Canada, etc. and South Africa. So that was very much the idea that was
[Guest 2]: the idea behind the Government of India Act. And if not now, then maybe if not in 1947, maybe you
[Guest 2]: know, it would have taken another 10 years. But the British at that point were quite clear that
[Guest 2]: they were eventually going to leave. And the hold up even to the Government of India Act,
[Guest 2]: the reason that the central part of the Act didn't come into fruition was not because the British
[Guest 2]: didn't want a central legislature, which is what was going to be created, but it was because the
[Guest 2]: Indians couldn't agree on themselves, among themselves as to what they really wanted the
[Guest 2]: central part of the Government of India Act to look like. The princes couldn't agree on whether
[Guest 2]: they wanted to, whether they were agreeable to federating with British India, which is what again
[Guest 2]: the British were trying to do. And Indian politicians themselves couldn't really agree on
[Guest 2]: what the sort of mechanisms for representation at the central level were going to be as well. So,
[Guest 2]: you know, there was a lot of the delay came up, came about because of lack of agreement amongst
[Guest 2]: amongst crucial stakeholders in India. Now we kind of look over it and say, well, you know,
[Guest 2]: actually, and this is again, a narrative that has come from the Congress that the Congress was
[Guest 2]: essentially the representative of the nation and everybody else was kind of an interloper who didn't
[Guest 2]: really deserve a seat at the table. So power should have been handed over to the Congress.
[Guest 2]: That is one way of looking at it. And you know, maybe the Congress did represent a large majority
[Guest 2]: of opinion in India, but it equally didn't represent all of it. So I think there's considerable force
[Guest 2]: to the argument that actually colonialism was well on its way out. If it if not 1945,
[Guest 2]: probably would have been 1955. But it's hard to imagine the British staying on any longer than
[Guest 1]: that. Maybe just to jump in and add a couple of things. The first is that people generally when
[Guest 1]: they sort of look back at the founding fathers, especially Patel, etc. They don't really see that
[Guest 1]: despite anything, there was a great amount of reform mindedness amongst Hindus, which has
[Guest 1]: again seemingly disappeared in the latter parts of the 20th century. So many of the people who
[Guest 1]: were sort of populating the Congress party and who were active in Hindu movements were active
[Guest 1]: in Hindu reform movements. This is very different from Hindi Orthodox institutions, which tried to
[Guest 1]: uphold some ancient code that they've distilled in in places like Banaras. So these are people
[Guest 1]: who are influenced more by Punjab, Gujarat and North Indian places than they are by some deep
[Guest 1]: Brahmanical culture, which, you know, they seek to preserve. So the reform mindedness was much
[Guest 1]: easier to implement for Nehru at that time than it would be for any leader, regardless of how much a
[Guest 1]: party stands today. All of these things seem impossible today. So when we look back, we are
[Guest 1]: seeking other people who may have given resistance to it, but we don't really allow for a space where
[Guest 1]: there was agreement amongst large parts of the reform minded population amongst Hindus, which
[Guest 1]: also thought to do away with many of the excesses that they saw in the personal law that the British
[Guest 1]: had granted to Hinduism. And the second thing that I wanted to add is that it was very much
[Guest 1]: a dispute. So Nehru does not just misread the communal question, but he also misreads the big
[Guest 1]: political question, and that is how sovereignty is passed on between the British Raj and independent
[Guest 1]: India. Now, Jinnah, the constitutionalist is much better equipped to in order to see a specific
[Guest 1]: form of continuation, where he sees an act that is implemented in Britain, that gives sovereignty to
[Guest 1]: India. And then the question that Indian politicians then have to engage with is how do
[Guest 1]: they distribute? How do they distribute that? And then for Jinnah, of course, it becomes a question
[Guest 1]: of two nations that are distinct, and that therefore require specific assurances in order
[Guest 1]: to operate or function under specific form of governance. Whereas for Nehru, what he sees when
[Guest 1]: he sees the Constituent Assembly is essentially the birthing place of sovereignty. So he sees the
[Guest 1]: Indian Constituent Assembly, and he says, we are giving birth to sovereignty itself. And of course,
[Guest 1]: that leads to his big dispute with Jinnah in 47, where Nehru says that all the assurances and all
[Guest 1]: the agreements that we have worked out, the Congress and the Muslim League, can now be
[Guest 1]: changed by the Constituent Assembly, because the Constituent Assembly is sovereign. And when
[Guest 1]: something is sovereign, they can do whatever they want. And Jinnah saying that, I'm not going to go
[Guest 1]: into a Constituent Assembly, if anything can happen, because I need assurances, I represent
[Guest 1]: a minority. And then when the Constituent Assembly is finally called in, what happens is that the
[Guest 1]: Muslim League boycotts it. And for that reason, because they say, we don't want to go and enter a
[Guest 1]: debate where everything is up for grabs, because that would leave us exposed to potential harm that
[Guest 1]: could happen, because we do not represent the majority. And if the majority disagrees with the
[Guest 1]: tracts that we have signed in order to secure our safety, then we leave with nothing. And then we
[Guest 1]: can also no longer challenge it. But that's the essential crux of this matter, presented in a
[Guest 1]: brutally broken down and simplistic way. But this is really, this is really where the moment of the
[Guest 1]: birthing of Indian independence comes into play. And if one follows that narrative and says,
[Guest 1]: well, yes, it was this magical moment that the Constituent Assembly suddenly birth sovereignty,
[Guest 1]: and you know, then, you know, created this wonderful nation that one could run with that,
[Guest 1]: and one could run with Nehru's narrative, and he becomes this larger than life persona,
[Guest 1]: who led the Indian people against the struggle, against the colonial struggle,
[Guest 1]: into independence. But the very sober story is that there was no way that colonialism could have
[Guest 1]: continued. And I'm not just thinking about the economic story, which is one in many,
[Guest 1]: but also because globally, there was no way that anybody could legitimize colonialism in this raw
[Guest 1]: manner, as it was implemented in Britain over India at that time. So whereas we have pockets
[Guest 1]: where colonialism tends to continue, it's in a slightly changed form, as we see with the
[Guest 1]: apartheid system in South Africa. It's no longer this sort of rigorous civilization mission
[Guest 1]: colonialism that we had in Britain. So that narrative has died. And it has died with the
[Guest 1]: two world wars. I mean, where is European civilizational advantage when you see them,
[Guest 1]: you know, slaughtering themselves in two world wars. So that story can no longer be told in any
[Guest 1]: credible manner. So after the Second World War, and the decimation of European states,
[Guest 1]: that civilization, that civilizational narrative has died. And that is what backed up much of
[Guest 1]: colonialism. So it was clear that colonialism was going to disappear. I think there's very
[Amit Varma]: few people who would actually challenge that. Yeah, I mean, in a sense, it was clear that
[Amit Varma]: colonialism would disappear. But in a sense, it lives on, like, you know, what was the key quality
[Amit Varma]: of colonialism that people objected to it was the oppressive state. And we just took over that
[Amit Varma]: oppressive state and is there and but you know, I've done an episode on VP Menon, for example,
[Amit Varma]: how he, you know, help Patel put, you know, get the union together, convince all the states and
[Amit Varma]: that whole process seems to me to be a kind of fast track colonialism, what the British did over
[Amit Varma]: hundreds of years, you know, Patel and Menon managed in a few months, or, you know, two or
[Amit Varma]: three years, they kind of managed to do. And I always feel, you know, when I read that portion
[Amit Varma]: of our history, I feel so uneasy over what it was done, the force, the coercion, the violence,
[Amit Varma]: broken promises, often. So today, I can, you know, sit and say that, hey, I love my beautiful country.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, there are, you know, people in Kashmir or the Northeast, who would who would
[Amit Varma]: say that colonialism lives on. So, you know, these are complicated arguments that still carry on,
[Guest 1]: because you know, the past never really dies. Maybe just to add, so when I said colonialism
[Guest 1]: was dead in its classical form, I meant as racial superiority and civilizational superiority,
[Guest 1]: that argument died, the concentration of executive power, and you know, top down state things that
[Guest 1]: continues to today that I mean, that's a that's a bigger question if that will ever disappear or not.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. So let's talk about the first of the debates in your book, which is really fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: because there is this larger question behind it. Now, when I sort of read the history of that
[Amit Varma]: period, and one thing I constantly have to remind myself is to put aside the hindsight bias,
[Amit Varma]: it is easy to look at the history of India and think that, oh, India in the form that we know
[Amit Varma]: it always existed, but of course, it did not. It was an idea, it was an idea that had to be given
[Amit Varma]: shape, in some sense, Nehru's discovery of India was also an invention of India, in a manner of
[Amit Varma]: speaking that this whole notion of India at that point was something abstract, something up in the
[Amit Varma]: air, the notion of Islam was not, you know, Islam was a real thing, history over hundreds of years.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the debates, which I'd like you to kind of fill me in on a little bit, and how that debate
[Amit Varma]: evolved is on how, you know, Muslims in India see themselves, like you spoke about how after the
[Amit Varma]: British came, they got the space to think about stuff and all of that. Iqbal himself writes about
[Amit Varma]: the evolution of Islam and how you know, after 1799, which was a low point, then, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is a sort of a brave new wave of thinking, he points to Wahab as being one of the people who
[Amit Varma]: started that. But it seems to me that one of the fundamental sort of conflicts that there must be
[Amit Varma]: in an Indian Muslim pre-independence, pre-India, therefore, is that what is your primary identity
[Amit Varma]: as such, if you are to pick one of the two? Is this India which doesn't exist, this nationalism
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, Nehru keeps talking about? Or is it Islam itself? And is there this larger Islamic
[Amit Varma]: Ummah and you're part of that and a nationality is just like a nation state is just happenstance
[Amit Varma]: of where you happen to be geographically located, but your actual allegiance is to this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: this larger entity? And how is this playing out? And this is one of the reasons I kind of think
[Amit Varma]: about Gandhi's alliance with the Ali brothers for the Khilafat movement to be so weird and
[Amit Varma]: incoherent, because what the Ali brothers are asking for is a restoration of the caliphate
[Amit Varma]: and the larger Islamic Ummah. And what Gandhi, of course, wants is the smaller cause of nation,
[Amit Varma]: India as an independent country. And it just seems that, you know, I mean, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: they come together for political exigency. And it's just a practical alliance, which works out
[Amit Varma]: so well for Gandhi. But give me a sense of how within Islam that notion is kind of developing
[Amit Varma]: and you know, how is thought kind of developing along those lines, like through the 19th century
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, leading up to independence, because really, the debate between Iqbal and Nehru seems
[Amit Varma]: to be a continuation of a larger debate, right?
[Guest 1]: I'm trying to answer this is a big question, but I'm trying to answer it backwards. And I go
[Guest 1]: to the to the big moment in the early 20th century, which is the Khilafat movement. So
[Guest 1]: the Khilafat movement is a movement that appears in India, where many Muslims rally together and
[Guest 1]: go onto the streets and say they want to preserve the Ottoman caliphate. Now Indians and the Ottoman
[Guest 1]: caliphate in general don't really have that much in common because the Ottoman Empire expanded
[Guest 1]: in different directions and therefore had no direct connection. There were a couple of
[Guest 1]: intermarriages between Muslim noblemen and the family of the Ottoman ruler. But by and large,
[Guest 1]: regular Indians didn't really didn't really converse about topics that were happening in
[Guest 1]: Turkey. And here we're talking about the end of the First World War, where the Ottomans had joined
[Guest 1]: the side of the Germans and are therefore now occupied because they've lost the war. And because
[Guest 1]: they occupied Britain, which is now the occupier is thinking about splintering up the Ottoman
[Guest 1]: Empire and also changing some of the structural things that are happening in this country.
[Guest 1]: But Britain, of course, has always been very, very of touching anything that has to do with religion.
[Guest 1]: So they don't really think about doing away with the system of the caliphate that is the system
[Guest 1]: that had been in place under the Ottoman rulers. But there's a big, big, big reform movement around
[Guest 1]: Mustafa Kemal, who's a Muslim nationalist leader. And like many Muslim nationalist leaders of the
[Guest 1]: early 20th century, he wants to change things radically. One of the things that he wants to
[Guest 1]: get rid of is the caliphate. So he and the Young Turks, which is the entire movement that is sort
[Guest 1]: of gathered around him, rebelling against the what they see as an archaic system that is governing
[Guest 1]: them. And they seek modernity, they want to be governed with the Swiss civil code. And they want
[Guest 1]: to, you know, write in the alphabet as the with the same with the Latin alphabet that the Europeans
[Guest 1]: are using and get rid of the the Arabic script. And what really happens is that that message is
[Guest 1]: received in very different ways in India. And it's received in a way as Britain interfering with
[Guest 1]: religion. Now, because Britain is also ruling over India, they think that, well, if they start
[Guest 1]: meddling with religion there, it's not far that they will may start meddling with religion here.
[Guest 1]: And people who have become some type of spokesperson for the Muslim population are
[Guest 1]: sort of going out on the streets and saying that, oh, my God, religion is in danger. Islam is in
[Guest 1]: danger. The ummah, which is this conceptual body of all Muslims, regardless of where they live,
[Guest 1]: is in danger of being splintered up by imperial forces. And we have to prevent that. And that's
[Guest 1]: an odd thing, because there's no immediate interest, like there's a secondary interest
[Guest 1]: that this may also happen in India, but there's no immediate interest for them to do so. And that's,
[Guest 1]: of course, an idea that appeals to Gandhi. He loves anything that is disinterested action.
[Guest 1]: So he says, wow, OK, so you have a cause that is not related to you, but you're doing it in
[Guest 1]: a sacrificial manner. That's an argument that is beautifully outlined by Faisal Devji in his book
[Guest 1]: on The Impossible Indian, a book on Gandhi. He says, OK, you're doing that over there in Turkey,
[Guest 1]: which has no connection and no immediate connection to what's happening in India,
[Guest 1]: so I'm going to support you. And that's really the holy slash unholy alliance,
[Guest 1]: depending on where one stands on the development in Indian history, that happens between Gandhi
[Guest 1]: and the Khilafat movement, which leads to people who are moderate, like Muhammad Ali Jinnah,
[Guest 1]: who really joins the Muslim League and becomes the leader there, to not engage with this movement,
[Guest 1]: which they see as something unleashing forces that can later on no longer be controlled.
[Guest 1]: So when we look at, you know, sort of that development, we see that there's a specific
[Guest 1]: form in which emotions are aroused amongst many of the Muslims, and may have been even though
[Guest 1]: Jinnah doesn't engage with it directly, it's a technique that he goes on to use later on in the
[Guest 1]: 1940s when he's trying to whip up a specific support for the idea of Pakistan and Muslim
[Guest 1]: separatism. So if we go further back, there's many other things that happen and that sort of
[Guest 1]: inform the debate that Nehru is having with Iqbal. And one of the most interesting things that I
[Guest 1]: found about the debate that Iqbal is having with Nehru is that the movement that they're discussing,
[Guest 1]: the Muslim reform movement that they're discussing, is a movement that is quintessentially Indian.
[Guest 1]: So it's born in Ghadiyan, there's a man in the 19th century by the name of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad,
[Guest 1]: who claims to be a messiah. So he says that I've come to reform Islam, and I'm a messiah,
[Guest 1]: but I'm also a reformer of Hinduism. So I'm also coming as an avatar of Vishnu. So I come in many
[Guest 1]: faces, and I bring all of these faiths together, and we will start a new great age, like a
[Guest 1]: millenarian vision of the future of humanity. Now, he receives, very much like the Arya Samaj
[Guest 1]: and other Hindu reform movement, a type of following that consists of many civil servants.
[Guest 1]: So these are people who have moved to cities who are now occupying positions of smallish power,
[Guest 1]: but taken together, they form essentially the cluster of people who can move big things within
[Guest 1]: the colonial apparatus. And many of the people in his movement, early adapters to his movements,
[Guest 1]: like his ideas, because his ideas say that, hey, we can adapt to modernity in a better way,
[Guest 1]: we don't have to return to Islam as it was sort of written in the earlier ages, but we can,
[Guest 1]: you know, sort of do new things with it, you know, sort of comply with British colonialism. It's one
[Guest 1]: of his messages, is that colonialism isn't all that bad, as long as we have religious freedom,
[Guest 1]: why should we really splinter away? And people like Muhammad Iqbal are also taken by that
[Guest 1]: movement. So many of his family members have very favourable views of what's happening and
[Guest 1]: what's coming out of Qadian. And Iqbal is also, never speaks out in any negative manner throughout
[Guest 1]: his life, apart from the 1930s, when suddenly he comes out with a couple of pamphlets where he's
[Guest 1]: saying that we have to fight back against the innovations that are happening within Islams,
[Guest 1]: and that are sort of threatening the specific, the core of Islam to disappear. And that puts him
[Guest 1]: in a somewhat awkward position, because now he has to identify what the core of Islam is. And
[Guest 1]: that's a question that many Muslim theologians have fought over the hundreds and hundreds of
[Guest 1]: years. But Iqbal comes up with a new answer to that old question. And the new answer is that
[Guest 1]: there's two elements that constitute Muslim identity, one of them being Tawheed, which is
[Guest 1]: the oneness of God, okay, monotheism and all of that, which may not come as a surprise. The second
[Guest 1]: one is Khatm-e-Nabuwat, which essentially means that the prophethood of Muhammad, peace be upon
[Guest 1]: him, is the last one. So nothing can come after that, no direct form of communication can occur
[Guest 1]: between the divine and humankind after that. Now, that has always been an Islamic doctrine,
[Guest 1]: so Iqbal is not inventing it. But he's putting it on a pedestal of saying that this is the most
[Guest 1]: important one. And he centers his entire political theory around that. So later on, the exact
[Guest 1]: development of Iqbal's thought, it's something that I discuss again in my book, but everything
[Guest 1]: becomes geared around that question. And for Nehru, when he comes into that debate, and he sort
[Guest 1]: of converses with Iqbal over this topic, he doesn't immediately understand the gravity of things,
[Guest 1]: because he says, well, here's a reformer who's come with a new message, and he's articulating it,
[Guest 1]: he's not calling people to pick up arms and, you know, cause great damage to society. So what
[Guest 1]: really is Iqbal's problem of writing so harshly against them and saying that they should be
[Guest 1]: excluded from Islam, because they've adopted a new prophet? And that's really where it takes off.
[Guest 1]: So the debate between two of the biggest thinkers that we have in India in the 20th century,
[Guest 1]: really erupts over a smallish reform movement from Punjab.
[Amit Varma]: This whole debate really was so incredibly fascinating for me. And it's also fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: because it makes one think about nationalism, because the debate is really about two things
[Amit Varma]: about religion and about nationalism. And, you know, at one point, Iqbal writes, and I'll quote,
[Amit Varma]: the student of history knows very well that Islam was born at a time when the old principles of
[Amit Varma]: human unification, such as blood relationship, and throne culture were failing. It therefore
[Amit Varma]: finds the principle of human unification not in the blood and bones, but in the mind of man.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, a social message to mankind is de-racialize yourself or perish by internecine war. It is no
[Amit Varma]: exaggeration to say that Islam looks askance at nature's race building plans and creates by means
[Amit Varma]: of his peculiar institutions, an outlook which would counteract race building forces of nature,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And later, he clarifies that what you know, the objection that he has to a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of nationalism, he sort of tries to break down what it means to him. And he says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: nationalism, in the sense of love of one's country, and even readiness to die for its honor
[Amit Varma]: is a part of the Muslim's faith. It comes into conflict with Islam only when it begins to play
[Amit Varma]: the role of a political concept and claims to be a principle of human solidarity, demanding that
[Amit Varma]: Islam should recede to the background of a mere private opinion and cease to be a living factor
[Amit Varma]: in the national life, stop quote. And this is, of course, how Nehru defines his nationalism per se,
[Amit Varma]: that the nation state is everything, the laws of the nation state will be the laws that the
[Amit Varma]: citizens obey, and religion is in your personal domain. And Iqbal is really saying that, no,
[Amit Varma]: you need to get a reality check, society is complex, you can't just assume that society
[Amit Varma]: is a blank slate and put a state on top. And, you know, all of that we have to, we have to take this
[Amit Varma]: into account, you know, and the first of the letters from Iqbal in that where he's responding
[Amit Varma]: to Nehru seems, you know, it seems like he's patiently, you know, without saying it in so
[Amit Varma]: many words, he's saying, listen, you have no idea, let me explain to you. And then he goes into
[Amit Varma]: his notion of Islam, which is incredibly fascinating. So one, is that a sort of a correct
[Amit Varma]: summation or understanding that, you know, of what Islam's core objection to Nehru's point was,
[Amit Varma]: and two, would you then say that these views are completely incompatible, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the way that it played out in modern India is, of course, more based on Nehru's nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we'd all kind of agree with that kind of vision in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: religion recedes to the private space. But Nehru seems to take it to an extreme and imagine that
[Amit Varma]: it is not an issue at all, you know, society is a blank slate. So what are your sort of thoughts on
[Guest 1]: that? I mean, just just briefly to continue from the train of thought that was coming in before,
[Guest 1]: no, no, no, I had finished, but then, you know, with your question, it sort of opens up in like
[Guest 1]: 50 different dimensions. The important thing is to, again, to look at the type of century that
[Guest 1]: we're in. So in the 20th century, the basic idea of the nation state where the nation is sort of
[Guest 1]: united through the sort of Blut and Boden variety of Herder and the other German philosophers,
[Guest 1]: where they say it's essentially about soil and, you know, ethnicity, etc, that had all failed,
[Guest 1]: right. So that has failed and quite miserably. And what happens here is that Iqbal, being the
[Guest 1]: modernist that he is, goes on to say that, well, if this type of living together and constituting
[Guest 1]: a nation doesn't work, the only way it can work is through any type of idea, is in the realm of
[Guest 1]: ideas, where it's no longer something material that can unite people, but it's something spiritual
[Guest 1]: that can unite people. And here he moves on and says that, well, Islam solves that problem for us.
[Guest 1]: So we can be a nation, we can be together and have that conception without falling into the
[Guest 1]: same fallacy of saying that it must be territory, or it must be ethnicity, or it must be language,
[Guest 1]: or it must be any of the other factors that sort of European states had used in order to
[Guest 1]: come to terms with their nationhood. And here I do feel that Nehru, for Iqbal, is making the mistake
[Guest 1]: of not taking anything else, but it's at least taking territory as the idea of nationhood,
[Guest 1]: it's people who occupy this specific land, and they can belong to any group, any ethnicity,
[Guest 1]: any religion, but the constitution will turn them into subjects and citizens of the Indian
[Guest 1]: Republic. And for Iqbal, that is a possibility. So that could happen, of course. But he says that
[Guest 1]: at a deeper level, people would always require more, they would require a sort of spiritual
[Guest 1]: pendant. And that he sees being written out of the modern state practices that Nehru tries to
[Amit Varma]: implement, and he's pushing against that. Iqbal's essays in this was so fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: because I was learning so much, and it gave me kind of rabbit holes to go down at a later point
[Amit Varma]: in time. And in one of them, he talks a lot about the three forces ruling Islam, which need to be
[Amit Varma]: countered. And he talks about, you know, Mullahism, where he talks about how Mullahs are extremely
[Amit Varma]: conservative, would not allow any freedom of Ijtihad, that is, you know, the forming of
[Amit Varma]: independent judgment in matters of law and so on. He talks about mysticism, where he says,
[Amit Varma]: quote, the masters of Islam was fed by the kind of mysticism which blinked actualities,
[Amit Varma]: innovated the people and kept them steeped in all kinds of superstition, stop quote. And the
[Amit Varma]: third factor he talks about is Muslim kings, where he writes, quote, the gaze of Muslim kings was
[Amit Varma]: solely fixed on their own dynastic interests, and who as long as these were protected, did not
[Amit Varma]: hesitate to sell their countries to the highest bidder, stop quote. And he sees, you know,
[Amit Varma]: progress happening against all three of those. And one of those, you know, as he points out is
[Amit Varma]: materialism, where he says, quote, materialism is a bad weapon against religion, but it is quite
[Amit Varma]: an effective one against Mullah craft and Sufi craft, which deliberately mystify the people with
[Amit Varma]: a view to exploiting their ignorance and credulity. The spirit of Islam is not afraid of its contact
[Amit Varma]: with matter. Indeed, the Quran says, and now he's quoting, forget not thy share in the world,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And you also see this in the 20th century, where reformers like Saeed Ahmed Khan
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, setting up universities, focusing on education. And this makes me wonder that whereas
[Amit Varma]: someone like Nehru, you know, his point of view would just have that one focus,
[Amit Varma]: how do we get independence, right? And how do we get rid of colonialism? But for a Muslim who's
[Amit Varma]: looking at Muslim society, for example, the focus is different. The focus is on, you know, as a
[Amit Varma]: society, how do we progress as Muslims? Perhaps, you know, some might even say the British Empire
[Amit Varma]: is a good thing, because if they weren't there, then we are outnumbered massively. And here,
[Amit Varma]: at least on paper, they treat us equally. And in many places, we are the elites and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth. So is there also a sort of tension here where Nehru has a uniform focus, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: is the independence of India, and as a secondary thing, getting Indians out of poverty, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth. In fact, I forget whether it was just one of them or both of them. But his responses
[Amit Varma]: to I think, perhaps both of Jinnah and Iqbal in this book kind of talk about that, that people
[Amit Varma]: are poor, you should be worried about that. What is this shit about, you know, taking religion
[Amit Varma]: so seriously? So is this an issue that in a sense, you know, they're coming at it from really
[Amit Varma]: different places, like, you know, there's that old saying about where you stand depends on where
[Amit Varma]: you sit. So, you know, does that kind of become a factor, which means that the dialogue, enlightening
[Amit Varma]: as it is for people like me reading it after, you know, so many decades, doesn't achieve anything,
[Guest 1]: because they're talking at cross purposes. Just to connect this point to a sort of broader point,
[Guest 1]: which is to say that minorities have always fared better under imperial conditions than they have
[Guest 1]: under the nation state, because the nation state logic is something that doesn't really deal well
[Guest 1]: with small numbers. And they very quickly can be turned into internal enemies that then have to be
[Guest 1]: pushed out of the borders, which explains many of the big movements that happened when the nation
[Guest 1]: states were implemented around the world in the 19th and 20th century, mass movements of people
[Guest 1]: being driven out of their lands. And essentially, the minority question is a modern question. So
[Guest 1]: when we start thinking about what a minority is, it's a modern question. So for Muslims,
[Guest 1]: once they understood in the early 20th century, that in any democratic republic that they would
[Guest 1]: be participants in, they would be in a permanent minority, things for them started to look very,
[Guest 1]: very different than for somebody like Nehru. For Nehru, you essentially summarized it so beautifully
[Guest 1]: that I don't even know if I should add much more. But essentially, his big problem was independence,
[Guest 1]: whereas the big question for Jinnah wasn't independence, that was a given that it was
[Guest 1]: going to come, but it was safeguards. What are the constitutional safeguards that you can give me,
[Guest 1]: you who speak for the majority, that I know that my people will be safe? And these are very
[Guest 1]: fundamentally different questions. And that changes the entirety of the outlook.
[Amit Varma]: An interesting aspect of, you know, that chapter where he's talking about, Iqbal is talking about
[Amit Varma]: the Ahmadiyyas and his objection to them. And one of the ways in which he states it,
[Amit Varma]: is he talks about the pre-Islam situation, where, you know, essentially, you'd have different
[Amit Varma]: dispensations in power at different points in time. And what he terms as one religious
[Amit Varma]: adventurer would come and everybody would follow him and then another religious adventurer would
[Amit Varma]: come and everybody would follow him. And it, you know, that's kind of what was happening. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, he gives that particular tenet of Islam so much importance, he calls it world changing,
[Amit Varma]: that there is a prophet and he's a last prophet. So that's an end to religious adventurers,
[Amit Varma]: you have a continuity there. And along that line, you can proceed. And in fact, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the definition you pointed out that there is only, you know, those two aspects, there is only one
[Amit Varma]: God and there was a last prophet and there will be no others. And he says that anyone who accepts
[Amit Varma]: these two is a Muslim. And then within that, you can go in different directions, you can have
[Amit Varma]: arguments on different things. These two are the only fundamental things. And of course, the
[Amit Varma]: Ahmadiyyas fail on the second count where they say that no, I'm not just an avatar of Vishnu,
[Amit Varma]: I'm also your prophet and so on. But I was struck here by the phrase that he used for those
[Amit Varma]: pre-magianistic times as it were, the phrase being religious adventurer. And could it be the case
[Amit Varma]: that in a sense, in a manner of speaking, Iqbal could have looked at something like Nehru as also
[Amit Varma]: a religious adventurer, like, of course, he's an atheist, and he's secular and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But he's also coming with an ideology with its own dogmas with its own certainties,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And therefore, Nehru is in a sense, you know, and I'm just thinking aloud,
[Amit Varma]: as much of a threat as you know, the Ahmadiyyas are that nationalism is as much of a threat,
[Amit Varma]: therefore, to Islam as a breakaway sect or a reformist movement could be.
[Guest 1]: For a believer, the big difference, of course, would be the difference between
[Guest 1]: revelation and rationality, with revelation being something that trumps everything that is
[Guest 1]: unchangeable, and that is eternal. So once you have somebody who comes and says that I've received
[Guest 1]: this as eternal wisdom directly from the divine, there's no debate that is to be had. So I don't
[Guest 1]: think he would really classify Nehru in that category. Because whatever Nehru does, wherever
[Guest 1]: his socialism comes from, it's not a revelation. But he's basing it on rationality saying that,
[Guest 1]: hey, here I have specific economic reforms that we can implement. And once we've implemented them,
[Guest 1]: you know, there's going to be good things that will come out of it, we will alleviate poverty,
[Guest 1]: we will make and then of course, all of the promises that he makes, but he has to make these
[Guest 1]: promises. You don't have to make these promises when you receive revelation, then the conversation
[Guest 1]: is a very different one, then you come with commandments. But you say this is how it's going
[Guest 1]: to be, right? Like Moses, of course, and other prophets. So Iqbal is very fearful of having that
[Guest 1]: type of pre-modern thinking still prevalent in Islam, because he sees it purged with the arrival
[Guest 1]: of the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, because he says now it's finished. So it's done.
[Guest 1]: And now what we can do is only use rationality. So we agree on the medium of exchange, which is
[Guest 1]: rationality. And within that, Nehru's opinion, despite his atheism, comes as but one other truth
[Guest 1]: that you have to engage with and that you have to construct, but that you can also deconstruct,
[Guest 1]: whereas a revelation cannot be easily deconstructed in that way. And that's really Iqbal's big
[Guest 1]: problem with the, as he called it, the Prophet of Qadian, who comes and says that, oh, these are
[Guest 1]: messages that I've just received from God. And Iqbal says now, there's no other engagement that
[Guest 1]: I can have with these, because it's eternal, it has to be true. So the only thing is that I can
[Guest 1]: say that, no, this is false, and I can push it back. And I can exclude it from the Islam that I
[Guest 1]: consider traditional and open to maternity. But with Nehru, he can very well engage, and this is
[Guest 1]: what he does, right? So he actually engages with him, it's an engagement that he doesn't have with
[Guest 1]: members of the Ahmadiyya community, many of which are his personal friends, but he doesn't have that
[Guest 1]: long conversation with them. But he has it still with Nehru, because he thinks that
[Guest 1]: his opinion is still based on rationality.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point. And I agree with you. But I would also point out that I think
[Amit Varma]: modern humans often tend to mistake rationalization for rationality, you could equally say that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: Nehru got a revelation from Lasky, or Nehru got a revelation from so and so, but he instead couched
[Amit Varma]: it in rational language and said, this is how society should be ordered for the good of blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, without perhaps knowing himself that that's kind of what he was doing. But leaving that
[Amit Varma]: aside, I mean, the entire debate was really fascinating. And what's interesting is that
[Amit Varma]: you point out that in a sense, both of them were proved wrong. So can you elaborate on that a
[Amit Varma]: little bit? I found that so fascinating that it's such an enriching debate, firstly, and if you come
[Amit Varma]: from each person's priors, you kind of have to agree with them. And yet, so there's a lot of
[Amit Varma]: truth in what they both say, but they were both kind of proved wrong by history. Elaborate on that
[Guest 1]: a bit. The first thing is, of course, that Nehru is right, because he says that once we adopt the
[Guest 1]: view that Iqbal is proposing, the state ends up just trying to prosecute people who've blasphemed.
[Guest 1]: So the state is just put in a very awkward position where it has to sort of
[Guest 1]: constantly go after people who are violating any type of eternal law. So the important thing here
[Guest 1]: that I forgot to mention earlier is that Iqbal is pushing the crowns of the colonial state
[Guest 1]: in order to implement constitutional reforms for the exclusion of Ahmadis. So he's not just saying
[Guest 1]: is that they should be excluded from Islam. And that's a critical point. But he's saying that
[Guest 1]: modern state structure should come in and exclude them for us. So it should be written down in the
[Guest 1]: constitution that these people cannot call themselves Muslim. It's a very big change. And
[Guest 1]: Nehru, of course, says that, well, that would mean intervention of the state into religion,
[Guest 1]: which is something that Indians have fought very hard for, that it wouldn't happen. And it's one
[Guest 1]: of the spaces that Indians had relative freedom to express themselves. One of the reasons that
[Guest 1]: so many reformist movements are popping up in India in the late 19th century is because this
[Guest 1]: space is fairly unregulated, and people can still go out and express themselves, which they can't in
[Guest 1]: the political sphere, because there's a fear that they will be slapped with sedition charges.
[Guest 1]: So Nehru is, of course, right, if we look at Pakistan, for instance, which is a state which
[Guest 1]: is repeatedly put in a position where it has to prosecute people for blasphemous issues. And they
[Guest 1]: come or the judges come in the difficulty that they have to revert back to a precedent, which
[Guest 1]: they don't really have. So then they have to enter Sharia law. And then they have to bring up
[Guest 1]: arguments in order to say why what has happened accounts for blasphemy, which is difficult for
[Guest 1]: a state structure to do, because these are essentially theological questions. On the other
[Guest 1]: hand, we also see that with the rise of the BGP in India, where blasphemy has now started to become
[Guest 1]: a thing again, which it wasn't for much of the, say, from the 50s to throughout the 80s. So Nehru
[Guest 1]: was very perceptive and correct in his assessment that once we open this Pandora's box, where we
[Guest 1]: allow the states to take over essentially theological questions, it very quickly spills
[Guest 1]: over into violence and purges, and much of the things that we now see happening in Pakistan and
[Guest 1]: in India. And Iqbal was correct that in a sense, if one doesn't protect anything within a religion,
[Guest 1]: but exposes it entirely against the sort of modern backdrop of progress and transformation,
[Guest 1]: then it's very easy that one loses the core and has nothing that remains through which one can
[Guest 1]: unite people. So in a sense, what happens is that the Nehruvianism, which was not rooted within
[Guest 1]: anything specifically Indian, but it took its cues from many things that were imported from the
[Guest 1]: outside. And, you know, if you want to be very blasphemous, I mean, as you were earlier, you
[Guest 1]: would say they came from, stayed as a revelation from Lasky into the Nehruvian thought. But if you
[Guest 1]: want to go down that route, then it becomes clear that such a construction will always lead to a
[Guest 1]: backlash, a nativist backlash. And then you could make the argument in order to support Iqbal's
[Guest 1]: case, that if Nehru would have been more open towards the religious forces and accommodated
[Guest 1]: them better, then it wouldn't have led to the sort of nativist backlash that we've seen with the BJP
[Guest 1]: and the Hindu right, because he would have been able to bring both of them together. So it's
[Guest 1]: interesting because both of these thinkers say something that is truthful, but at the same time,
[Guest 1]: both of the visions, you know, taken apart lead to these very sort of different consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because the world is complex and there are multitudes and everything. Let's talk about
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah now. Now, one, there is, of course, you know, we discuss, you know, the accidents of
[Amit Varma]: happenstance, which we often say where you stand depends on where you sit. And again, they sat in
[Amit Varma]: really different places because of events and Gandhi had a lot to do with that. And we've
[Amit Varma]: sort of discussed that. I read the letters that you reproduced. And one of the interesting things
[Amit Varma]: there is I'm just trying to put myself in Jinnah's mind that here is a guy who, you know, a couple
[Amit Varma]: of decades before this was a leading light of the Congress and expected to take it over. And now he's
[Amit Varma]: having to talk with a guy who was just a kid then, who has what he might consider to be simplistic
[Amit Varma]: notions, who is a follower of a man he really doesn't like, which is Gandhi, who basically cut
[Amit Varma]: his ticket in the party. And this guy is lecturing to him that, hey, the Congress does this, the
[Amit Varma]: Congress does that, I am so generous, so I will speak to you and we will discuss it. And there is
[Amit Varma]: that kind of dynamic, which is really interesting. And what also strikes me in the letters is that
[Amit Varma]: Nehru is, you know, trying so hard to be gracious, in the sense of tell me what your problems are,
[Amit Varma]: listen, let's talk about them. I want to talk, I want to meet, I want to do all of that. And Jinnah
[Amit Varma]: initially in the exchange is just like, no, no, it's, you know, I'm not going to do this over a
[Amit Varma]: letter, I'm not a petitioner, we have to meet in person, and so on and so forth. And he's just
[Amit Varma]: basically being difficult. And Nehru is saying, no, tell me, tell me, tell me what you want. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, we'll discuss about them bit by bit. And then Jinnah eventually alludes to it. And he
[Amit Varma]: puts a couple of articles out there. And you know, one of them has these eight points,
[Amit Varma]: he alludes to a 14 point program. And then Nehru really gets into the weeds and kind of starts
[Amit Varma]: talking about it. So one, what were the principal differences? And two, was the argument really in
[Guest 1]: good faith on either side? Maybe I can just come in on that question briefly before, I'm sure
[Guest 1]: Tripudaman has stuff to add on this as well. But the main way in which Jinnah is reconstructed in
[Guest 1]: much of historical books, regardless if they happen to be scholarly accounts or not,
[Guest 1]: and regardless if they are very fond of Jinnah as a politician or antagonistic to Jinnah as a
[Guest 1]: politician, one of the things that everybody agrees upon is that Jinnah approached the entire
[Guest 1]: debate that happened at the eve of independence between the Congress and the Muslim League
[Guest 1]: as a hard nosed constitutional lawyer showing no emotions, and being completely almost detached
[Guest 1]: from the topic that he was arguing. And then the sort of basic thinking goes that Jinnah has always
[Guest 1]: been like an amazing lawyer, and he's always fought cases. And, you know, one of the ways in
[Guest 1]: which you fight cases, even in things that you don't believe in, is to just argue the best possible
[Guest 1]: case for your client, Pakistan being the client, Jinnah being, you know, the person that has grown
[Guest 1]: larger in statues, simply because it's just reflective of the sort of bigger movement that
[Guest 1]: is kind of behind him. And I've always found that very troubling, because there must have been an
[Guest 1]: emotional side to that man as well. And that emotional side is very easily, easily to discover
[Guest 1]: when we see his sort of love marriage that he has with a Barsi woman, that we see the way in which
[Guest 1]: he tries to cultivate his personal relationships. So clearly, there is this emotional dimension
[Guest 1]: that nobody really wants to engage with, and simply do away with Jinnah as a constitutional
[Guest 1]: lawyer, you know, arguing, bickering over point one, point two, point three. So part of the reason
[Guest 1]: we selected this conversation, because we could have also selected other conversation that he's
[Guest 1]: having with Nehru in the 40s, is to show that it is not Jinnah, who's the person who's bringing up
[Guest 1]: point one, point B, and point two and point three, and, you know, paragraph six, but it's actually
[Guest 1]: Nehru, who's the one that, oh, we have a debate here. So let's just, you know, structure it in
[Guest 1]: this legalistic manner. And then let's try to solve it. Whereas Jinnah says that this is not
[Guest 1]: a legal question. This is not a constitutional question. This is a question of minorities and
[Guest 1]: majorities. This is a question of democracy. And these questions cannot be solved through simplistic,
[Guest 1]: legalistic thinking. And the moment that Jinnah sort of transcends the law and the constitution,
[Guest 1]: I think we get a much better picture of him as a person, of him as a thinker, and of him
[Guest 1]: contributing to the emergence of the two nation states, because inadvertently, he gave birth to
[Guest 1]: both India and Pakistan, because otherwise it's conceptually not possible. But the main purpose
[Guest 1]: of bringing in these lectures was to show that there's the larger sort of human side to Jinnah,
[Guest 1]: that of course there is. It just boggles my mind that for seven decades, it's just this one figure
[Guest 1]: who, as I read in a recent biography, cried only once when his wife died. So once. He's never done
[Guest 1]: it otherwise, because clearly otherwise the biographer would have known. So the very assumption
[Guest 1]: that these historians had who wrote about Jinnah is, for me, just violates common sense.
[Guest 1]: And as a first sort of contribution, we wanted to bring in that debate in order to open it up
[Guest 1]: and say, hey, who's he as a person? And can he be a person that thinks beyond the law,
[Guest 2]: and that is not tied down by the law? Yeah. And just to just to kind of briefly jump in
[Guest 2]: after Adil, it's also important to remember the backdrop to this conversation. So one,
[Guest 2]: of course, is, as you mentioned, putting yourself in Jinnah's shoes, you know, you're the big leader
[Guest 2]: who essentially has the Congress taken away from him. And, you know, he has an upstart who isn't
[Guest 2]: particularly well qualified, doesn't really have any achievement to his name, is young, is also
[Guest 2]: the son of someone who had been your colleague. You know, Motilal and Jinnah had very much been
[Guest 2]: colleagues. And so for that, for Jinnah is also in a way, you know, coming up against a brash
[Guest 2]: upstart. And anybody would sort of bristle a bit at that point. But equally, there's the political
[Guest 2]: backdrop, which is, you know, as important, if not more important than, than the sort of personal
[Guest 2]: relationship, which is that there have been elections in the provinces under the Government
[Guest 2]: of India Act, Congress has won mostly, but in UP where the Congress has won, there has been a
[Guest 2]: proposal to have a coalition ministry, which Azad has gone and set up and the Muslim League is
[Guest 2]: eager to enter. And then Nehru basically torpedoes the proposal by going and saying, well, you know,
[Guest 2]: why didn't the party wind up and just join the Congress? Why should there be a coalition?
[Guest 2]: So essentially, that proposal is torpedoed. Nehru is also the brains behind what comes up as the
[Guest 2]: Muslim outreach program that the Congress launches, and for which it actually piggybacks a lot,
[Guest 2]: and a lot more so than Jinnah on the Muslim clergy, on the on the sort of Deobandi
[Guest 2]: clergy who they wish to use as a sort of conduit to Muslim public opinion.
[Guest 2]: And so, ultimately, of course, that drive fails. And, you know, the rest is history, as we know.
[Guest 2]: But so those are two very, very important political backdrops. So this conversation
[Guest 2]: is happening at the time where Jinnah basically feels that Nehru and the Congress are also mounting
[Guest 2]: sort of effort in a way to kind of existentially challenge the Muslim League and in a way
[Guest 2]: in a way that also threatens Muslim political rights, because once you accept the argument
[Guest 2]: that the Congress effectively speaks for all Indians, so it's the only it's the only kind
[Guest 2]: of legitimate body to which the colonial state can transfer power, it is to accept the argument
[Guest 2]: that the Muslims do not require these sort of mechanisms to protect their political rights.
[Guest 2]: And equally, for personally for Jinnah, it would mean accepting redundancy, which
[Guest 2]: neither he nor the Muslim League at that point, are willing to accept. And so I think a lot of
[Guest 2]: the kind of icy tone that this conversation carries almost where you feel that they're
[Guest 2]: talking across purposes, comes from the fact that there is at that point an existential threat
[Guest 2]: for the Muslim League from the Congress. And that's even though it's not really, it's never
[Guest 2]: really talked about explicitly in those terms, that very much informs where the two men are
[Guest 2]: coming from, because for Nehru and the Muslim League, what the elections have demonstrated
[Guest 2]: is that the Muslim League is a spent force that it doesn't really have that much political
[Guest 2]: relevance. So you know, why should they really be treated in a way as sort of equals at a bargaining
[Guest 2]: table? And for Jinnah, the idea is that, well, if you can, you know, go back on your word,
[Guest 2]: as you've done in UP, that's what will happen in democracy is that, you know, you'll say,
[Guest 2]: well, we don't need you, you know, go and sit in a corner or do as you're told, then how can
[Guest 2]: essentially can Muslim political rights be guaranteed in a democracy where the Congress
[Guest 2]: will always hold the whip hand, structurally hold the whip hand. So that political backdrop
[Guest 2]: really, really informs this conversation. And it's worth, it's worth really keeping in mind as well.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, you've also mentioned, for example, the 1937 provincial elections,
[Amit Varma]: which of course was a big win for the Congress, but not so much for Jinnah where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah suffered a crushing defeat as all India Muslim League secured less than 5% of the Muslim
[Amit Varma]: vote. Although the slim vote share amounted to some 108 seats from 485 reserved for Muslims
[Amit Varma]: under the communal award, Jinnah had failed to move voters in Punjab and Bengal with his plea
[Amit Varma]: that Indian Muslims had to stand under the political flag of a single party. He scored
[Amit Varma]: seats primarily in Muslim minority areas. In Bengal, Muslim voters flocked to the local
[Amit Varma]: Krishak Praja Party. In Punjab, they resorted to Sikandar Hayat Khan's Unionist Party in droves.
[Amit Varma]: Both the Muslim League and the Congress had failed to make significant inroads to Muslim voters. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, the question is that, you know, at one level, of course, you know, Jinnah leaves the
[Amit Varma]: Congress because he's just pissed off at what the hell is happening, Gandhi and Khilafat and this
[Amit Varma]: upstart Jawahar and all of that. So he quits and then he goes in this other direction. And you
[Amit Varma]: wonder whether it is happenstance upon happenstance in the sense that once he has locked himself into
[Amit Varma]: this position where he's part of the Muslim League and he's fighting for Pakistan, the rest of his
[Amit Varma]: life, in a sense, regardless of what he believes, really becomes this legalistic battle to ensure
[Amit Varma]: this one outcome, whether or not he actually has the people with him because he's not in that sense
[Amit Varma]: a man of the masses. I mean, the other big change that kind of happens with Gandhi's emergence is
[Amit Varma]: that the nationalistic movement actually becomes a national movement with leaders like Gandhi and
[Amit Varma]: then his acolytes like, you know, Patel and Nehru being able to gather large crowds and becoming
[Amit Varma]: mass leaders, which Jinnah really wasn't. And so one can understand sort of Nehru's frustration
[Amit Varma]: with that, like at one point, you know, in this section, he also talks about how this is really
[Amit Varma]: an upper class thing. This whole communal problem is an upper class thing. And there's nothing really
[Amit Varma]: down there. To what extent is this true? Like, how representative are Jinnah's views of what
[Amit Varma]: Muslims in India actually felt? And even if the causation didn't come that way, did it begin to
[Amit Varma]: go the other way? Did his stances and the stances of the Muslim League kind of move it in a slightly
[Guest 1]: different direction? I mean, speaking simply from the elections that happened? Yes, he grasped the
[Guest 1]: spirit of the vast Muslim population, because otherwise, he wouldn't have gained the majority
[Guest 1]: that he does later on. So the insult that Nehru is sort of leveling against Jinnah saying that this
[Guest 1]: is purely like an upper class elite problem, and that doesn't really affect the agriculture and
[Guest 1]: workers which make up the majority of the Indian population, it's tied to the history of the Muslim
[Guest 1]: League. The Muslim League is an association that is primarily funded and that is created by Muslim
[Guest 1]: noblemen and, you know, talukdars of the UP and people like the Aga Khan. So these are the people
[Guest 1]: who sort of come together and constitute this. But on the other hand, when we look at Sikandar
[Guest 1]: Hayat, and we look at the Punjab Agricultural Parties, these are also feudal organizations.
[Guest 1]: These are not organizations of the common man and the common agricultural sort of casting their vote
[Guest 1]: freely. But these are big landholders that have essentially monopolized over vast trajectories
[Guest 1]: over the Punjab and that control the vote. So it's with the death of a big leader of that party,
[Guest 1]: Sikandar Hayat himself, that essentially, Jinnah can swoop in. So as opposed to thinking of Jinnah
[Guest 1]: as, you know, getting the political question wrong, he gets something really right. And that
[Guest 1]: is that he doesn't believe that this feudalism is going to continue. So therefore, I would say that
[Guest 1]: Jinnah actually reads something into the Muslim population, which Nehru neglects. And that is that
[Guest 1]: there is a fear that majoritarian rule will hollow out any type of advantages that they can make
[Guest 1]: in a free democracy. And that is a fear, as Tripu Dhamma just pointed out, that is further stoked
[Guest 1]: when Nehru refuses to bring in people from the Muslim League, when he's formulating his cabinet,
[Guest 1]: which, of course, objectively, he should have done. Like, there's no excuse for that. So even
[Guest 1]: the biggest sort of fan of Nehru here has to say that that was just a big, big, big blunder,
[Guest 1]: because that could have taken out the wind from the sail of the Muslim League, because once he
[Guest 1]: would have accommodated the Muslim League properly, he would have shown goodwill that this is a
[Guest 1]: potential constellation through which a united India could be run. And by shunning that, of
[Guest 1]: course, he gives away that possibility. And then with the death of some of the big feudal leaders,
[Guest 1]: of course, the Punjabis completely opened up and, you know, stands behind Jinnah and his project.
[Guest 2]: Just to and sort of just to add, it's actually not just as Adil says, it's, it is a mistake to
[Guest 2]: to kind of spurn that offer of a coalition, especially after Azad agrees to it. And,
[Guest 2]: but it's also the launching of this sort of Muslim outreach program, which really stokes,
[Guest 2]: which really kind of essentially really irks the Muslim League, because it, it's a bit like,
[Guest 2]: okay, you know, now we're going to go for the jugular, you haven't won any seats,
[Guest 2]: let's see if we can wipe the party out altogether. And that causes it brings about this
[Guest 2]: odd alliance with a very orthodox sort of Muslim clergy with the with the Jamaat,
[Guest 2]: that that between the Congress and the Jamaat, on whom essentially, because the Congress doesn't
[Guest 2]: really have Muslim leaders, there's a handful. And, you know, Azad is the most prominent among them.
[Guest 2]: And Jinnah, you know, derides him as a Congress showboy. So for for this sort of Muslim outreach
[Guest 2]: program, Muslim mass contact program, that, you know, narrows the driving force behind,
[Guest 2]: they latch on to the Jamaat, creating a kind of very strange alliance, really, between this sort
[Guest 2]: of organized, supposedly secular Congress party, and this kind of Islamist, this sort of Islamist
[Guest 2]: Jamaat, on whom the Congress really wants to depend to, to really, you know, move into the
[Guest 2]: Muslim masses and wean them away from the Muslim League. And this in itself also creates a kind
[Guest 2]: of backlash, because actually, it turns out most Muslims do not really want to be associated with
[Guest 2]: the Congress. And it kind of spurs the Muslim League to really embrace this kind of this sort
[Guest 2]: of mass, mass politics as well. And partly, I know a lot of people, including Adil, disagree
[Guest 2]: with the arguments presented by Venkat Dhulipala in his book, but there is little doubting that
[Guest 2]: actually, this sort of misguided Congress attempt to kind of ride on the coattails of the Jamaat
[Guest 2]: to, you know, kind of mount an existential battle against the Muslim League really backfires,
[Guest 2]: because it essentially provokes the Muslim League to kind of take the battle to the people in a way
[Amit Varma]: that it hadn't before. Yeah, and the Venkat Dhulipala book, of course, is in search of a
[Amit Varma]: new Medina, which is also interesting. I'll link that from the show notes. There are historians
[Amit Varma]: who contend that the Quit India movement was a blunder from the Congress, because the entire
[Amit Varma]: Congress ended up in jail. And, you know, in those years, and the Muslim League really
[Amit Varma]: strengthened itself. And while it was an insignificant force before that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: by the time you know, the war ended, and all the pieces fell where they were, the Muslim League
[Amit Varma]: were at the table, they were big players again, and partition may not have happened at Quit India,
[Amit Varma]: which some call a blunder had not happened. What's your take on that? As an aside? I mean,
[Guest 1]: I know it's not relevant to the book at all. I know that Tripudaman has a passion for what
[Guest 2]: if history so I'll let him answer that one. No, I mean, well, not just me, many figures,
[Guest 2]: including Nehru thought Quit India was a blunder. Nehru didn't want it. Some like Raj Gopalchary
[Guest 2]: actually defied Gandhi to say, well, he was going to support the government. And at that point,
[Guest 2]: actually, it was a blunder, because of course, as you say, there's the Congress got crushed, etc.
[Guest 2]: But also because it didn't really reflect, it allowed the it kind of given very easy
[Guest 2]: sort of excuse, because once the British were locked in a kind of existential struggle
[Guest 2]: against the Axis powers, it made very little sense really to, to kind of mount this kind of
[Guest 2]: movement, because there was broad support, even within the Congress, especially amongst the sort
[Guest 2]: of Congress radical wing, there was broad support for the war effort, because everyone saw that it
[Guest 2]: was a kind of global struggle against fascism. And so it didn't really it didn't achieve much.
[Guest 2]: But beyond that, it also what it did was it made it was very violent. There were riots,
[Guest 2]: there's destruction of property, etc. And what it did was that it made the situation far worse.
[Guest 2]: Once once the war ended, not just because the leaders had been jailed, but also because
[Guest 2]: political action had sort of really shifted gears into this sort of quite riotous activity.
[Guest 2]: And actually, I I'd perhaps go even a step further, I would say even the the non cooperation
[Guest 2]: movement was actually a blunder, it achieved nothing, a lot more would have been achieved
[Guest 2]: if the Congress had gone to the roundtable conferences, and shape the formation of the
[Guest 2]: Government of India Act rather than simply saying, well, we're going to continue to, to boycott it.
[Guest 2]: So yeah, I mean, that's, that's essentially my argument. And just to add to that, so we've
[Guest 1]: mentioned a number of scholarly books, there's another one that has really impressed me, it's
[Guest 1]: written from the ground up, but one of the early organizers and founders of one of the Congress
[Guest 1]: chapters in the late 19th century 8080, I think is when he creates the first chapter, is a guy
[Guest 1]: called Swami Shraddhanand, he later becomes famous as the sort of Hindu monk, and then he disagrees
[Guest 1]: with Gandhi over non cooperation. And he disagrees fundamentally over the Congress treatment of
[Guest 1]: Muslims, not because he's anti Muslim, but because he thinks that this is not a way to include people
[Guest 1]: into the party. And he speaks about all types of perks that Muslims are given in the different
[Guest 1]: Indian National Congress meetings that happen and that he of course, partly organizes partly
[Guest 1]: participates in, and he sort of follows that trajectory because he lives, I think he passes
[Guest 1]: away in 1926 or something. But he really sees the development of the Congress Party, like from the
[Guest 1]: beginning to the very end. And he has two chapters on this. And they're fantastic, because he's
[Guest 1]: writing it as he sees it. And of course, he's later one of the one of the people, one of the few,
[Guest 1]: I think, Hindus, sanyasis who speaks at the Jama Masjid, and manages to unite Hindus and Muslims
[Guest 1]: in a number of efforts. But essentially, like his disagreement with Gandhi also comes over
[Guest 1]: non cooperation and over a very basic matter of the burning of cloth of foreign cloth that Gandhi
[Guest 1]: is propagating. And he just says that we have so many people who are literally walking around
[Guest 1]: without proper clothing, and we are here deciding to burn them up in big piles, because we want to
[Guest 1]: send a political message. So the radical wing of the Congress Party, of which Gandhi, of course,
[Guest 1]: is a member, always had that sort of backdrop of a more rationalistic set of ideas that didn't
[Guest 1]: necessarily come in the sort of suited way as we would expect, like Mahmood Ali Jinnah with his
[Guest 1]: sort of nice suits. But it also came with people who were wearing saffron robes, but who were
[Guest 1]: articulating a message of communal harmony and unity that seemingly was acceptable to many
[Guest 1]: Muslims, at least in New Delhi, where he was very popular.
[Amit Varma]: An interesting bit of trivia about Swami Shraddhananda is that he was actually the first
[Amit Varma]: Mahatma. He was given the moniker of Mahatma before Mahatma Gandhi, I think it was called
[Amit Varma]: Mahatma Munshi Rama or something, I forget the exact moniker, but he was the first Mahatma and
[Amit Varma]: he was in fact the first non Muslim to be allowed to speak from the Jama Masjid, I think in 1918,
[Amit Varma]: if I remember correctly, and eventually he got murdered in his home by, you know, another
[Amit Varma]: counterfactual. What if this Mahatma survives and becomes a dominant force? And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: earlier when Tripur Dhaman was talking about the non-cooperative movement not working or
[Amit Varma]: Quit India not working, or, you know, you mentioned the whole thing of why should we
[Amit Varma]: burn all these clothes when, you know, people don't have clothes to wear. And it led me to
[Amit Varma]: the thought about how, you know, sometimes it's hard to tell the difference between posturing
[Amit Varma]: and principle defiance. Though I think if it's Twitter, you can just assume it's posturing.
[Amit Varma]: So, to get back to, you know, you had one kind of passage where I felt that you really sort of
[Amit Varma]: nailed Nehru's approach and the way that he looked at Jinnah. And I'll again quote from your book,
[Amit Varma]: where you write, quote, in Nehru's unspooling of history, taking the occasional cue from Marx and
[Amit Varma]: Hegel, the forces of progress were constantly rubbing against the forces of reaction. Yet,
[Amit Varma]: for most people, it was difficult to draw a line between the two because there are so many
[Amit Varma]: middle forces. These middle forces of vested interests muddied the picture by appealing to
[Amit Varma]: earthly emotions and urges. Speaking directly to Jinnah, Nehru identified the communal question
[Amit Varma]: as a conservative reaction to the progressive forces. Employing religious identities as the
[Amit Varma]: primary drivers in politics that Jinnah did with his Muslim League had made him petty-minded.
[Amit Varma]: It had also distracted him from, and these are Nehru's words, from the real problems of the
[Amit Varma]: country. Stop quote. And it strikes me that one, if Nehru then thinks like this, that means he's
[Amit Varma]: already passed judgment. He slotted himself as someone for the forces of progress. He slotted
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah as someone for the for the forces of reaction. And how is any debate possible? And
[Amit Varma]: there is a little bit of this sort of condescending language in his letters as well, which are
[Amit Varma]: beautiful and eloquent as always. But Jinnah comments on the arrogance where he says, quote,
[Amit Varma]: You start by saying, I was somewhat surprised to see this list as I had no idea you wanted to
[Amit Varma]: discuss many of these matters with us. Some of these are wholly covered by previous decisions
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress. Some others are hardly capable of discussion. Nehru's words end here and Jinnah
[Amit Varma]: continues. And then you proceed to your conclusions, having formulated the points
[Amit Varma]: according to your own notions. Your tone and language again display the same arrogance and
[Amit Varma]: militant spirit as if the Congress is a sovereign power. And as an indication,
[Amit Varma]: you extend your patronage by saying, obviously, the Muslim League is an important communal
[Amit Varma]: organization, stop, quote, and so on. How much of this and you have you guys have obviously read
[Amit Varma]: much more of Nehru's letters than I have. I haven't read too many of them besides what is
[Amit Varma]: in the book. So how much of the dialogues or the debates that Nehru enters into are at the same
[Amit Varma]: time colored by the judgments that he's already passed this notion that he is right, he's decided
[Amit Varma]: he's right. And therefore, he just has to convince the other person or patronize them or whatever the
[Amit Varma]: case might be. And do you think this was an impediment in these, quote, unquote, debates?
[Guest 1]: I mean, speaking favorably for Nehru, I would say that he
[Guest 1]: does have an open mind. But you know, with the acquisition of more and more power,
[Guest 1]: there's a shrinkage of his imagination. And that is something that one can say is excusable.
[Guest 1]: Or one can say being purely idealistic, he shouldn't have done that. But the main thing
[Guest 1]: that really rubs off the wrong way, is that he thinks that Nehru has already assumed that he
[Guest 1]: is the colonial state. And now he's put in a position to petition and prove to him that
[Guest 1]: something is different from his imagination, because whatever he has thought is already
[Guest 1]: the standard and everything else is a deviation and needs justification, whereas his position
[Guest 1]: doesn't need justification. I wouldn't go that far. I don't think really that this is what
[Guest 1]: Nehru is thinking, or how he is approaching that problem. And of course, the Buddha Manojya said
[Guest 1]: that Nehru does change his position regarding the Muslims, particularly after partition.
[Guest 1]: But that means changing your position after millions of people have undergone great, great,
[Guest 1]: great tragedies. So anybody who wouldn't change their position after seeing the massive onslaught
[Guest 1]: that took place during those grim days, I don't think there's any human who could do that. I do
[Guest 1]: think that Nehru was also more nuanced, and that he would have been able to be convinced differently,
[Guest 1]: if the argument would have really pushed him to engage with the Muslim population at large,
[Guest 1]: that seemed to not have entered his basic realm of people that were surrounding him.
[Guest 1]: So while he was surrounded by Muslims, I do think that there was a deep disconnect between him
[Guest 1]: and what was happening and the changing of the popular opinion that was happening amongst Muslims.
[Guest 1]: He just totally misread that.
[Guest 2]: I mean, just as an aside to what Adil said about how Nehru misread Muslim opinion,
[Guest 2]: I mean, a very famous incident is when Nehru goes against the advice of the viceroy and
[Guest 2]: government agencies. He goes to the northwest frontier province because he thinks that because
[Guest 2]: there is a communist government there, everything's great, and the Muslims, they love him,
[Guest 2]: and actually they don't. And they throw stones at him, and he gets injured. And that kind of really
[Guest 2]: sort of colors him. And then he says, the demonstrations organized by Muslim League
[Guest 2]: thugs, and so on and so forth. And so that really colors him against Muslim mass politics as well,
[Guest 2]: because he thinks it's essentially being run by Muslim League thugs. And that sort of caricature
[Guest 2]: builds itself in his mind. And perhaps actually Adil is right, that more mass engagement would
[Guest 2]: perhaps have convinced Nehru of some merit in what Jinnah was saying.
[Guest 1]: And just to add to that thought, because I have it, and I want to get it out, when you said that
[Guest 1]: you had trivia on Shraddhanand that he was a Mahatma, the real trivia would probably be that
[Guest 1]: he was the first Mahatma to also get a gun license. Because when he created the schools,
[Guest 1]: his gurukuls in the jungle, far away from civilization in order to educate
[Guest 1]: Indians that would not be immediately, that would not stand immediately under the shadow of
[Guest 1]: imperial control, which he also saw as extending to mind control. There were constant attacks of
[Guest 1]: panthers on the food that he was storing. So in order to get rid of those panthers,
[Guest 1]: he asked the colonial state to grant him a gun license so he can scare them away.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating story. I mean, this is another movie along with that painting,
[Amit Varma]: you could also kind of do a movie around this guy, the other Mahatma, or the Mahatma that
[Amit Varma]: never was or whatever. When you hear the debate play out, and it's still really relevant, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's relevant to modern India because there is sort of a criticism that what the Hindu right
[Amit Varma]: wing forces in India are doing today is really trying to be a Hindu Pakistan. You know, like a
[Amit Varma]: few years back, you know, Advani went to Pakistan, praised Jinnah and immediately got sidelined in
[Amit Varma]: his own party because how dare you praise Jinnah, you know, the enemy. But the point is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in many fundamental ways, they would they would perhaps agree with Jinnah that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the whole notion that a nation state cannot be secular, for example, that if there is a dominant
[Amit Varma]: majority, then yeah, Hindu Rashtra is sort of inevitable. And in those letters, in fact, you see
[Amit Varma]: Nehru fighting back against the notion that he wants a Hindu Raj where he's saying that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: no way, no way, you know, this is what the Congress has done and said and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So these sort of debates are alive again. And when I think of Jinnah, frankly, I think of him as a
[Amit Varma]: King Lear kind of tragic figure at that scale. Because I think so much of his interior life
[Amit Varma]: would have been so stunted and full of pain. And I think, you know, he lost it. He lost the Congress
[Amit Varma]: in 1920. And after that, I don't think it really mattered. There was no winning for him. It was
[Amit Varma]: just a really dark and of course, a very interesting story. But is that debate still
[Amit Varma]: alive today? You know, and if so, you know, which way do you think is likely to go? And do you feel
[Amit Varma]: that that debate was inevitably going to, you know, be around today because it wasn't settled?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, so what's what's your sense of that?
[Guest 1]: I'm just going to start, I know Dripudaman would really come in with like the better
[Guest 1]: counterfactuals. But what I want to say is that, okay, so if we say that Gandhi wouldn't have
[Guest 1]: appeared, but Jinnah would have also not taken over the Congress Party, some of the people next
[Guest 1]: in line would probably have been Swami Shraddhanand. Swami Shraddhanand enjoyed like great rapport
[Guest 1]: amongst the Arya Samaj reformists. He was wearing saffron, but he was an acceptable figure amongst
[Guest 1]: the Muslims too. And he was moderate. So he was also trained as a lawyer. So he would have gotten
[Guest 1]: he wasn't that far apart from Jinnah's position. Of course, he would have opposed the separation
[Guest 1]: for Pakistan. But he would have also been willing to allow for specific conditions to emerge that
[Guest 1]: such a separation would have not been necessary, right? So for him, giving more safeguards to
[Guest 1]: Muslims in order to assure them would have come more naturally from a sacrificial standpoint,
[Guest 1]: than from a contractual standpoint and a democratic standpoint that Nehru espouses.
[Guest 1]: So I do think that when we think about the reformist Hindu right, so not the orthodox Hindu
[Guest 1]: Hindu right that, you know, seems to be mushrooming now everywhere. But the reformist Hindu right
[Guest 1]: definitely had overlaps with Jinnah, and perhaps could have accommodated somebody who's arguing
[Guest 1]: for the protection of religion better than somebody who's saying that one person one vote.
[Guest 1]: And there's a good intellectual case to be made for all of these positions.
[Guest 1]: There's also a really good case to be made for for Nehru, even though I'm brutally overlooking
[Guest 1]: him here and sort of framing him as the sole reason that that partition took place because
[Guest 1]: he couldn't get rid of his democratic inclinations that would have asked him to count votes evenly
[Guest 1]: without looking at where these votes were coming from. But essentially, I do think that all of
[Guest 1]: these positions have really good merit. And if we really indulging in counterfactuals, I do think
[Guest 1]: the non existence of Gandhi is the biggest one, because I don't think that Jinnah would have been
[Guest 1]: able to control the league in the same way as somebody who's coming from the majoritarian
[Guest 1]: community, because there would have been a backlash against him. And that would have come
[Guest 1]: from the Mahasabha, other Arya Samaj closed institutions. And I do think that one of their
[Guest 1]: leaders would have been more acceptable somebody like Shraddhanand, if he had not died and been
[Guest 1]: killed by a Muslim who accused him of blasphemy against the Prophet, then things could have could
[Guest 1]: have looked very differently. No, I think I don't think it's true that I come up with very good
[Guest 2]: counterfactuals, because as much as I like dabbling in counterfactual history, I do also recognize
[Guest 2]: its limitations. Otherwise, I would be writing some books called what if and they would probably
[Guest 2]: sell a lot more than my current ones do. But no, but just sort of branching out a bit from
[Guest 2]: from what Adil says, is that we have to recognize that Indian nationalism in itself,
[Guest 2]: the sort of there was always this sort of secular mobilization, you know, and the sort of radical
[Guest 2]: wing, but the kind of right, the sort of cruder elements that you know, that we now identify
[Guest 2]: with the Hindu right were always there, this was the sort of trait of referring the, you know,
[Guest 2]: of mobilizing Indian society around, around sort of religious festivals, you know, Tilak and the
[Guest 2]: sort of Ganpati festivals are, are a good example, or Gandhi kind of appealing to the, to the idea
[Guest 2]: of Ram Raj, or, you know, in in sort of public life, the Britain's British people being derided
[Guest 2]: as, you know, cow eaters, or, you know, Mlechas or Yavans, or this sort of quite charged terminology.
[Guest 2]: So this sort of element has always been a part of Indian nationalism. And I would argue quite
[Guest 2]: a significant part of Indian nationalism, because Congress mobilization, we really look at the top
[Guest 2]: layers. But when you really look at local politics, as it kind of played out, which is where the real
[Guest 2]: mobilization was happening, the people kind of really engaging with, with sort of, with mass
[Guest 2]: politics were really doing the groundwork, if you, you know, wanted to have a demonstration,
[Guest 2]: and you wanted 100,000 people at the demonstration, the real groundwork would be done
[Guest 2]: at this sort of level. And at this sort of level, Indian nationalism was very much symbolized by,
[Guest 2]: you know, by this sort of terminology. And so that element always existed in a way,
[Guest 2]: what one might say was that really, someone like Nehru was sort of riding a tiger, even to begin
[Guest 2]: with. And so this, this debate was inevitable, whether, whether Gandhi appeared or not this,
[Guest 2]: this, this, this real debate of what it meant really, to be Indian, and who could be accommodated
[Guest 2]: in this definition was always, you know, really, really going to appear. But I would agree with
[Guest 2]: with Adil that figures like Swami Shraddhanand would have been a lot more palatable to all shades
[Guest 2]: of political opinion. And many of the points that Jinnah raised had had merit. And the reason,
[Guest 2]: there's a there's a funny quote in Lord Wavell's diaries, where he says, you know,
[Guest 2]: actually, there is there's something to be said for both sides, and they can come to a conclusion,
[Guest 2]: a conclusion, if only it was someone else doing the negotiations, and not Jinnah and Nehru, because
[Guest 2]: there was ultimately, as Adil says, a very convincing case to be made for all sides. So
[Guest 2]: it's hard to really pick and say, well, here's someone who was right. And here's someone who
[Guest 2]: was wrong. And I think that sort of negotiation could have been conducted a lot better by other
[Guest 2]: people, whether it was Swami Shraddhanand, or even if we were to pick someone else who
[Guest 2]: essentially understood the fundamentals of the Muslim position a bit better than Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: Two contradictory thoughts come to mind that on the one hand, thank God you had sort of Nehru and
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah arguing because at least we get to see the eloquent debate play out and you have these
[Amit Varma]: letters and they're expressing their views. And today, if you look, it's still a life question
[Amit Varma]: today, but you no longer have a discourse on this. You just have shouting on all sides and
[Amit Varma]: rhetoric on all sides. And there is really no reasoned debate that there are reasoned laments
[Amit Varma]: from people who are on the outside, but from actual stakeholders, there isn't that much
[Amit Varma]: talking to each other. But like you pointed out that I would assume that a lot of this was just
[Amit Varma]: personal, like, like you said, if it was anyone other than these two guys, maybe it would have
[Amit Varma]: worked, but there was just too much baggage there. And it's kind of that it happens to be these two
[Amit Varma]: people, you know, just thinking aloud, I mean, there was a, you know, again, on the road of
[Amit Varma]: happenstance, but this time in modern politics, there was an essay by Keshava Guha, where he was
[Amit Varma]: talking about how untimely deaths have changed recent Indian politics, for example, had Pramod
[Amit Varma]: Mahajan not died, it might not have been Modi, who was an ex leader of the party, it could have been,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Mahajan as Prime Minister, he wouldn't have really perhaps let Modi come up in the way
[Amit Varma]: that he did really astute guy and fine political sense. And equally in the Congress, you had people
[Amit Varma]: like Jitendra Prasad and Madhav Rao Scindia, and Rajesh Pailet all poppet, which basically meant
[Amit Varma]: that there was no, you know, second round of leadership that could, you know, challenge
[Amit Varma]: the current leadership, you know, which which just feels so defunct today. So kind of moving on from
[Amit Varma]: the Jinnah section, you know, to the Patel section, which is really interesting. And,
[Amit Varma]: and it's also interesting that you chose, you know, foreign policy as a particular debate to
[Amit Varma]: highlight, in a sense, a whole China question, what what kind of made you choose that particular
[Amit Varma]: issue, because in a sense, one could say that that is like out of the four debates that are
[Amit Varma]: happening in this book, that is a one which in a sense is no longer live in the sense that kind of
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy, which basically every government now takes up is a sort of a realist foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, it's not tinged by the kind of ideology that Nehru's foreign policy quite
[Amit Varma]: obviously was. And also, the China question itself is in a completely different place,
[Amit Varma]: that debate doesn't really happen anymore. So given all the things that the differences that
[Amit Varma]: the two might have had, what kind of prompted you to pick this?
[Guest 2]: I think I don't think that question is over. So when we were writing it, of course, the
[Guest 2]: a matter of coincidence, or when we were writing it, that's when the sort of old clash of the
[Guest 2]: Galwan Valley kind of took off. And one thing was that it demonstrated that there's still no
[Guest 2]: consensus on India's relationship with China. But even more so, Nehru and Patel's clash,
[Guest 2]: when they talk about the broader contours of foreign policy, it's also very much a kind of
[Guest 2]: difference about how they conceptualize India and its place in the world. For Nehru, as you know,
[Guest 2]: we alluded earlier on during our conversation, where Adil mentioned how Nehru saw the
[Guest 2]: Constituent Assembly as the birthplace of a new sovereignty. In the same way, Nehru saw
[Guest 2]: India's birth as a sort of break with the past as the creation of this, of this, you know,
[Guest 2]: new country is almost a bit like, if you read how Nehru writes about it, it's not that far off
[Guest 2]: from, from a kind of the American idea of manifest destiny, because for Nehru, you know,
[Guest 2]: this is going to be the sort of beacon in Asia, it's going to, it's going to kind of essentially
[Guest 2]: show the way towards peace and socialism, to as he calls them, the smaller brothers.
[Guest 2]: And that's a funny term in itself, because he doesn't use the term younger brothers.
[Guest 2]: He uses the term smaller brothers to refer to the other Asian countries. And for Patel,
[Guest 2]: India is very much the legal successor to the British Raj. That's how he defines its role in
[Guest 2]: world affairs. And that's also how he wants India to conceive of itself. It's the sort of recipient
[Guest 2]: of the sovereign powers, prerequisites and responsibilities that, that the British Raj
[Guest 2]: enjoyed. And that's what really plays out in this larger debate on foreign policy, which is,
[Guest 2]: well, does India have the sort of, this sort of manifest destiny kind of role to play in the
[Guest 2]: world as the birthplace, as a sort of birthplace of the first, you know, country to have thrown
[Guest 2]: off the shackles of European colonialism, and to lead Asia and to sort of, you know, create this
[Guest 2]: sort of third way, in some cases, or is India a sort of repository of an earlier sovereignty
[Guest 2]: with an identity and role already defined, where, you know, it's a much more mundane,
[Guest 2]: as you say, real politic kind of understanding of foreign policy. And that debate hasn't really
[Guest 2]: ended. It's still very much going on. And you can very much see it in the foreign policy of
[Guest 2]: the current government, which sort of seesaws between this kind of idea of manifest destiny of,
[Guest 2]: you know, India playing this sort of larger than life role in the world, or between, you know,
[Guest 2]: those who kind of prescribe a more pragmatic, kind of, you know, essentially more materialist
[Guest 2]: foreign policy, keeping in mind the sort of economic and material constraints that India
[Guest 2]: faces, and of essentially looking at it in the sort of very essentialist materialist sort of
[Guest 2]: terms. And because that debate is very ongoing, and those two poles are still, you know, they
[Guest 2]: might have morphed a bit, but ideologically, that sort of idea of manifest destiny may not be,
[Guest 2]: I guess, driven by the idea of socialism as Nehru's was, but it's still a very sort of
[Guest 2]: powerful idea that India is and should be playing this sort of huge role in world affairs, and how
[Guest 2]: it should be playing that role in world affairs, or what image it should kind of carry really,
[Guest 2]: around its shoulders, when it is playing that role, is also very, very much a life question.
[Guest 2]: Because for Nehru, that very much what gives him that position is democracy, secularism,
[Guest 2]: you know, so on and so forth. And whether that position still stands, whether to play
[Guest 2]: that sort of role, or to have that sort of global stature, whether democracy, secularism,
[Guest 2]: minorities matter all that much for the Indian Prime Minister to be a figure of global importance
[Guest 2]: or not, this is, you know, this is very much still a matter of debate. So I think, for us,
[Guest 2]: in these questions, seeing as they still exist, very much deserve even more importance than the
[Guest 2]: sort of debate that Patel might have had with Nehru on the question of Muslims or on secularism,
[Guest 2]: which in a way, we've all sort of read about, it's a bit more common.
[Guest 1]: So maybe just to add to that, what Nehru also does is completely misread China,
[Guest 1]: because he's a man of his time. And what Nehru has seen of China isn't really what China was,
[Guest 1]: because from, say, the Treaty of Nanking, so mid 19th century, China began the what is called in
[Guest 1]: China, the 100 years of humiliation. So that is the century of humiliation. So they are defeated
[Guest 1]: by the Brits, by the British Empire, through the superior technology and sea warfare that the
[Guest 1]: British are able to mount. And then the British carve out smallish colonies flecked around the
[Guest 1]: Chinese continent. And what then happens is a period of exploitation. Everybody has heard of
[Guest 1]: the opium wars. This is where big British, today, we would call them pharma companies, but big
[Guest 1]: British companies are shipping in opium, and essentially pushing it upon the people making
[Guest 1]: huge, huge profits. And it's not just British companies to do that. It's also companies that
[Guest 1]: have a very close connection to India. The two big families are Baghdadi Jewish, who have a close
[Guest 1]: connection to Bombay, of course, the Qadouris and the Sasoons. And they essentially go and China
[Guest 1]: takes about a century to recover. And it recovers through the coming of the Communist Party under
[Guest 1]: Mao, which manages to purge a the nationalists and the colonialists out of their country,
[Guest 1]: right. So they retake Shanghai, which is where many of the Communist Party leaders are sort of
[Guest 1]: educated. And they managed to sort of get control of the entirety of the country, of course, with
[Guest 1]: the nationalists being now in Taiwan, where they still are under a disputed sovereignty. And once
[Guest 1]: China finds itself, the last thing that it wants to be called his little brother, and, you know,
[Guest 1]: envision a new century under Indian leadership. So anybody who's read the history and seen the
[Guest 1]: impact that China has had on global trade throughout world history for at least a millennium
[Guest 1]: would say that it would be natural for China to return to its place of dominance and to India to
[Guest 1]: be in the position of the smaller brother. So Nehru essentially misreads of what's happening
[Guest 1]: in China and doesn't really understand that this is going to be a global powerhouse that is going
[Guest 1]: to dominate, because the way in which they have engaged with technology has always been very,
[Guest 1]: very sophisticated and superior to many other Asian countries. So I do think that that misreading
[Guest 1]: really leads Nehru to make these concessions that he does. And, but Adil being the hard-nosed
[Guest 1]: realist, of course, he sees that this is not merely like a small flame that has emerged in Asia. But
[Guest 2]: this is the reawakening of a mighty dragon. I think when I mean, Adil is really, really
[Guest 2]: hit the nail on the head. And, and this is one of the reasons why this, this chapter is so
[Guest 2]: interesting is because it provides quite like important sort of clues towards Nehru's thinking
[Guest 2]: and Nehru's character, which in a way sort of at a moment where he is holding executive power,
[Guest 2]: and on his way to kind of almost, you know, sort of being the all powerful figure that he's about
[Guest 2]: to be. And it provides, you know, very interesting ways of really gaining insight into how Nehru is
[Guest 2]: thinking, and how he's behaving at this time, which I think make this chapter particularly
[Amit Varma]: interesting as well. Yeah, it's a fascinating chapter. And, you know, you also point out how
[Amit Varma]: since 1927, Nehru was seen as a foreign policy guy, because, you know, he's on the executive
[Amit Varma]: committee of the League Against Imperialism, along with Albert Einstein. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so mixing with some big folks there, no Photoshop pictures, that's actually them together. And then
[Amit Varma]: you sum up his beliefs and assumptions about China in this way, where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: these goals and interests were underpinned by many of Nehru's own beliefs and assumptions,
[Amit Varma]: an exaggerated sense of India's importance as a cultural fountainhead of the new Asia,
[Amit Varma]: and instinctive affinity for the notion of Asianism that he axiomatically assumed was
[Amit Varma]: shared by China and Southeast Asia, a sentimental and cultural xenophilia, a sympathetic attitude
[Amit Varma]: towards communism, and an ambivalence about if not active distrust of the United States.
[Amit Varma]: These beliefs, in turn, inform Nehru's conception of his own and India's place in the global arena
[Amit Varma]: as a self appointed leader and spokesperson of Asia, and the third world more broadly,
[Amit Varma]: against European imperial domination, with a self anointed obligation to mitigate conflict
[Amit Varma]: on the Asian continent, and as a big brother, helping and guiding smaller brothers, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you also point out that India did not have the military might and the economic resources
[Amit Varma]: to actually play the part that Nehru wanted it to play. But the one thing that at least,
[Amit Varma]: you know, could make it seem possible was Nehru's own self image as this leader who took this
[Amit Varma]: country out of colonialism, it's a democracy, huge population, all of that. So a lot of that
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy then became about projecting Nehru's image. Would that be a correct summation?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, yeah, that is, that is quite a, that is an excellent sort of
[Amit Varma]: summary. I just realized that I quoted you for most of the summary.
[Guest 2]: No, no, because there's me patting myself on the back. But no, for Nehru, a lot of foreign
[Guest 2]: policy does eventually become about promoting and protecting that image as well. Because that
[Guest 2]: image is essentially what allows India to bridge the material gap. You know, that's why,
[Guest 2]: you know, that's how India is playing a role in Korea, and all of these things. Because, well,
[Guest 2]: at the end of the day, India really has no real local stand in Korea, it also has no
[Guest 2]: real material power that it can bring to bear. But Nehru's sort of own standing on the global
[Guest 2]: stage is, is, is big at that point. And it only ever, it only takes a blow in 1962. Because what
[Guest 2]: happens then basically shows to the world that actually Nehru, you know, doesn't really know
[Guest 2]: what's going on, the sort of intellectual foundations of his foreign policy are shown to be
[Guest 2]: not very strong. And there's an interesting quote by John F. Kennedy, to whom Nehru turns at that
[Guest 2]: point for help. And he asked for American air squadrons to start bombing China. And Kennedy
[Guest 2]: basically says that the Cuban Missile Crisis is on at that point. And Kennedy basically says,
[Guest 2]: he finds Nehru's inability to kind of think about what bombing China means for the world during,
[Guest 2]: during the Cuban Missile Crisis, when he's locked in a sort of, you know, he's one step away from
[Guest 2]: nuclear war with this with the Soviet Union. And he comments, and I think he says something like,
[Guest 2]: you know, Nehru has lost both his nerves and with them his senses. So a lot of Nehru in foreign
[Guest 2]: policy, it's hard to separate the sort of personal from, from the institutional. Because at one
[Guest 2]: level, yes, there's an ideological element. But another level, there's also a personal element
[Guest 2]: of keeping the, you know, the Nehru, the global statesman, bolstered up. But that bolstering up
[Guest 2]: at some level is also, I guess, useful, because if you, it's the only real thing that India has
[Guest 2]: on the global stage, it's ultimately a really poor third world country, which nobody seems to
[Guest 2]: really realize, because there's an unstated assumption in letters. They say India will
[Guest 2]: obviously soon play a great role in world affairs. And we've been saying that for, for 70 odd years.
[Guest 2]: And whether or not India is playing a great role in global affairs is still open to question.
[Guest 1]: And maybe just a book recommendation that if people are excited about this, and they want
[Guest 1]: to learn what's happening on the flip side, so what's happening in China itself, because there,
[Guest 1]: I mean, a lot of things are happening with the nationalists and the communists and you know,
[Guest 1]: the people who are living in the international settlement. There's a fantastic book by Rana
[Guest 1]: Mithra that was published last year. Rana Mithra is an Indian, British Indian academic,
[Guest 1]: who teaches, he's a professor at Oxford. And it's called China's Good War. It was published by
[Amit Varma]: Harvard last year. And it's an outstanding book. Just speaking of this sense of manifest destiny,
[Amit Varma]: and I'd say China probably has that. I don't know, you know, when we speak of India's great place in
[Amit Varma]: the world, I think Nehru was a true believer. And that was that led to his downfall. But I think
[Amit Varma]: anyone who speaks about it today is really just posturing. I mean, come on, they know, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: surely the default foreign policy today has to be kind of realist. But then on the other hand,
[Amit Varma]: you think of our Prime Minister wearing his name on his suit when he's meeting President Obama. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, who knows, one of the sort of misconceptions that you point out, you point
[Amit Varma]: out that there are three misconceptions about Nehru's foreign policy, one that he remained
[Amit Varma]: unchallenged in the foreign policy domain, he basically decided what Congress foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: was by himself. Second, there weren't colleagues who could inform foreign policy. And third,
[Amit Varma]: that the flaws in his approach only became visible after, you know, 1959, when the China thing started
[Amit Varma]: erupting. And all of these are not true. You know, you speak about how ministers like KC Neogi,
[Amit Varma]: Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, John Mako Mathai, Ambedkar, when all of them quit, they pointed to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, deep misgivings about the direction and orientation of India's foreign policy,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it. What were the key moments at which Nehru sort of got it wrong? Like,
[Amit Varma]: we know that he romanticized the notion of the relationship with China, that whole Indy Cheney
[Amit Varma]: bhai bhai and all of that was romanticized. And he thought that, you know, China will be
[Amit Varma]: friendly with us and all of that. He also had an ambassador in China, K M Panikkar,
[Amit Varma]: who seemed incredibly blind to the Chinese cause and was constantly sort of talking it up. And
[Amit Varma]: what was sort of the places where you start realizing that he's made a mistake? I mean,
[Amit Varma]: one of the interesting sort of points of contention that you see, for example, is Tibet,
[Amit Varma]: where Patel's realist position is that we have, like you said, his approach was that
[Amit Varma]: India should see itself as a successor to the British Empire. And therefore, that old accord
[Amit Varma]: that was that the British Empire made with Tibet, we should stick to that. And we should respect
[Amit Varma]: them accordingly. And we should help them defend themselves and all of that. And Nehru kept getting
[Amit Varma]: it wrong on Tibet in the sense that he didn't allow them to declare independence. He didn't,
[Amit Varma]: you know, allow the US to arm Tibet and send military there. And then whatever happened,
[Amit Varma]: happened. So what were the sort of arguments around this? And what are the other sort of
[Amit Varma]: critical moments during this period? You pointed out the Korean War, of course. What were the other
[Amit Varma]: critical moments during this period? And when did Patel kind of start expressing himself? Like,
[Amit Varma]: was this disagreement on foreign policy something that only happened around this time reached a
[Amit Varma]: flashpoint in November 1950, as you point out in all those cabinet meetings? Or was there,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the way that we've seen that many of these debates go back years, if not decades,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and beyond these individual people. But over here, you know, did this go back?
[Amit Varma]: Did or was it simply never relevant? Because hey, India is not an independent country,
[Amit Varma]: and it only becomes relevant when we gain independence?
[Guest 2]: This was very much a question even before independence and Nehru
[Guest 2]: calls the Asian relations conference in March 1947. So even before independence,
[Guest 2]: he's really thinking about where to position India. And at the conference, he very much talks about,
[Guest 2]: you know, how a new dawn is coming for Asia. It's, you know, imperialism is on its way out.
[Guest 2]: India is very much the sort of, as the first country to become independent is very much the
[Guest 2]: leading light. And he also refers to China a great deal as you know, this great country to which,
[Guest 2]: you know, a lot is owed, and which is, you know, soon going to take its place in the sun and
[Guest 2]: so on and so forth. So he's very much thinking about these questions. Even though ostensibly
[Guest 2]: not that many people are interested in the Congress, it would be wrong to say that they,
[Guest 2]: you know, that no one else was interested. Because obviously, people were and this sort
[Guest 2]: of starts coming to a head vis-a-vis Pakistan, because many Neoghi and Pukherjee, of course,
[Guest 2]: most obviously, but also people like Patel, believes that Nehru's stance towards Pakistan
[Guest 2]: is too accommodative. Because Hindu refugees are being pushed out of East Pakistan into West
[Guest 2]: Bengal. And many see that India should essentially be taking military action to either defend them,
[Guest 2]: or some sort of quite, you know, militarist types on the right, even demand that India carve out
[Guest 2]: a piece of then East Pakistan as forced East Pakistan to cede territory, where Hindus from
[Guest 2]: that country can be, could be resettled to live in safety. So there is, there's a lot of, and
[Guest 2]: Nehru very much interprets this as something, as you know, he says, public posturing intended to
[Guest 2]: bully him into war, create, you know, public pressure on him, push him towards military action.
[Guest 2]: Military action. So this sort of debate really is already going on. And then vis-a-vis China,
[Guest 2]: it kind of kicks off once of course, a communist takeover is there and people are forced to
[Guest 2]: confront the question of having a united China and also a China that's interested in exporting
[Guest 2]: communism on its borders. And this continues for a very long time. You know, even when I was looking
[Guest 2]: at the debates around the First Amendment, you still had parliamentary conversations throughout
[Guest 2]: the 50s, where people talk about what's happening in Tibet, and Nehru keeps, you know, telling them
[Guest 2]: that actually, you know, nothing wrong is happening in Tibet, etc, etc. So this is very much a live
[Guest 2]: question throughout the 50s. Now, there is a flashpoint over East Pakistan in early 1950.
[Guest 2]: Ultimately, Nehru has his way, he has a conversation with Tiagat Ali Khan, and they devise
[Guest 2]: all these things like the minority commissions in both countries and those sorts of mechanisms to
[Guest 2]: try and deal with the problem. You have another flashpoint once the Chinese do march into
[Guest 2]: to Tibet initially in September, October 1950. Even though throughout 1950, this question,
[Guest 2]: you know, has has come up again and again, you have conversations between Nehru and Rajagopal
[Guest 2]: Chari. Actually, even before the cabinet infamous exchange with Patel, there's a furious sort of
[Guest 2]: exchange of letters with Rajagopal Chari on this question. And then, again, as you
[Guest 2]: go through the 1950s, there's, there's actually several points at which, I mean, then you have
[Guest 2]: Ambedkar's resignation, very famously, it's remembered for Ambedkar's criticism of Nehru
[Guest 2]: for not supporting him with the Hindu code bill and so on and so forth. But actually, Ambedkar
[Guest 2]: devotes a substantial part of his speech to foreign policy. He literally says, and in this,
[Guest 2]: he's not that far off from what Patel has been saying, which is a that India has essentially
[Guest 2]: been taking a stance that is isolating itself from global political currents. We're plowing
[Guest 2]: a kind of lonely furrow. India is having to spend far more than necessary on security and defense,
[Guest 2]: because we have no friends, since we've effectively turned our backs on everyone
[Guest 2]: courtesy, Nehruvian foreign policy with its ideological moorings. And he, Ambedkar thinks
[Guest 2]: it's disastrous. And he says, you know, I, I forget the quote, exactly. But he says, you know,
[Guest 2]: it's something that's a cause of great anxiety to him, as to where Indian foreign policy is,
[Guest 2]: is taking India. And then in the 50s, of course, Tibet kind of continues to bubble away, you have
[Guest 2]: the high point with the signing of Panchsheel and Hithichini Bhaibhai. And then it's pretty much all
[Guest 2]: downhill from there. The big challenge, of course, though, comes at this moment with Patel. Because
[Guest 2]: what we see with Patel's letter is, Patel actually says that India should, of course, be doing
[Guest 2]: something. And what that means is, but Patel recognizes that there are material limitations.
[Guest 2]: He recognizes that this means, you know, and he kind of hints at it by saying, you know,
[Guest 2]: this will bring us to the question of how India's manages this relationship with the US and, you
[Guest 2]: know, the broader question of where India stands vis-a-vis the Cold War. And so for him, you know,
[Guest 2]: there is recognition that that involves a closer alignment with the US, that it, which necessarily
[Guest 2]: involves a kind of break for Nehruvian socialism, which very much involves, and Nehruvian socialism
[Guest 2]: is really the sort of guiding light of everything that Nehru does. So it is actually the clash
[Guest 2]: that's happening on a very superficial level, it's just about what to do with China. But on a deeper
[Guest 2]: level, it's actually many of these things coming together as to what, where does India stand,
[Guest 2]: how does it conceive of itself and what it's doing. And there, Patel is articulating a radically
[Guest 2]: different position. So a U-turn here means not just saying, okay, well, now we were being friends
[Guest 2]: with China, but you know, instead, we'll start being stern with them. It actually involves
[Guest 2]: turning their, you know, really turning your back on Nehruvianism entirely, aligning with the US,
[Guest 2]: which inevitably means also the kind of end of Nehruvian socialism. So what Patel is, so,
[Guest 2]: and he's willing to fight it out, everyone believes, the diplomatic sort of circles in
[Guest 2]: Delhi believe that actually the showdown is going to cause a U-turn in Indian foreign policy,
[Guest 2]: which is obviously going to have repercussions. You know, as I mentioned, this clash actually is
[Guest 2]: as close really, it's the kind of moment where you really would wonder what if,
[Guest 2]: because it's the closest that India really comes to challenging Nehruvian orthodoxy.
[Amit Varma]: And what's kind of interesting here, which you point out is that China all this time was dissing
[Amit Varma]: India and dissing Nehru. At one point, they called him, quote, a hireling of Anglo-American imperialism,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And Nehru's reaction to that is to want to prove them wrong by going overboard in
[Amit Varma]: supporting them. So he's supporting them for a place in the, a permanent place in the,
[Amit Varma]: in the UN. He, General Assembly, he's, you know, letting Tibet unravel the way that it kind of did.
[Amit Varma]: You know, all of these things are happening. And Patel sort of took the hard-nosed stance that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, before we recognize this government as a legit government, which as you point out,
[Amit Varma]: India was the second non-communist country to do after Burma slash Myanmar. Before we do that,
[Amit Varma]: let's tell them that, okay, don't mess with Tibet, and we'll recognize you. And at least,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you draw those lines in the sand, and then they're drawn forever.
[Amit Varma]: But Nehru didn't kind of do that because he had this excessive romanticization or trust or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to me to be sort of a classic example of being incredibly dogmatic on an issue
[Amit Varma]: and simply not changing his mind. I'm intrigued by, you know, you're saying that and of course,
[Amit Varma]: what he's also doing is he's driving the US further away from himself. Perhaps again,
[Amit Varma]: the ego came into play because they invited Liaquat Ali Khan first and he's like,
[Amit Varma]: what is this, you know, our manifest destiny, we should have gone there. But he drives them away.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, it's anything but non-aligned, therefore, right from the start. And you said
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, he had to do that. Otherwise, Nehruvian socialism would have been under threat.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't understand that part. Can you elaborate on that? Because it's perfectly
[Amit Varma]: possible to ally with someone in terms of foreign policy, but leave every aspect of your
[Amit Varma]: identity, the way that it is like the way, for example, Saudi Arabia aligns with
[Amit Varma]: the US without compromising on what they do internally. So why would it have been a threat
[Amit Varma]: to Nehruvian socialism? Or are you saying that his worldview as articulated, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there would have been a fissure within it from the way people outside saw it. So his credibility
[Guest 2]: would have suffered? No, I'm saying both things. So first and foremost, what would have happened
[Guest 2]: is the stature of Nehru, the global statesman, which was, you know, dependent on him being the
[Guest 2]: champion of, you know, against imperialism, against colonialism, and essentially, you know,
[Guest 2]: leading India down the socialist path would have suffered if, you know, India had aligned with the
[Guest 2]: US to kind of check Chinese ambitions in Tibet. So that's point one. Point two was that effectively,
[Guest 2]: it would also have dented his image, because, you know, it would have proven what the Soviets and
[Guest 2]: the Chinese were saying, which is that Nehru is a hireling, you know, as I quote in the book,
[Guest 2]: of Anglo American imperialism, this was not just a kind of Soviet slash Chinese charge,
[Guest 2]: it was also a charge made by the communists in India by their slogan, you know,
[Guest 2]: meaning that this freedom is somehow false, and fake, and actually, the sort of structures of
[Guest 2]: colonialism are still being maintained. So, for Nehru, there wasn't this sort of stark divide
[Guest 2]: between the national and the international, as we see it now, because he saw internationalism as
[Guest 2]: very closely tied to nationalism. And the bridge there was to be provided with, to be provided by
[Guest 2]: socialism, since socialism by itself meant peace. And as you mentioned, you know, colonialism and
[Guest 2]: capitalism came together in sort of one great package, he, you couldn't be in his mind,
[Guest 2]: you know, that it would be not just fissuring, it's a kind of cognitive dissonance, which,
[Guest 2]: you know, he would find hard to wrap around if you could be socialist, but essentially,
[Guest 2]: how could you be socialist if you supported capitalism abroad, which is what essentially
[Guest 2]: brought war and violence, which is essentially the root cause of war and violence. Secondly,
[Guest 2]: aligning with the US, I mean, it is possible for Saudi Arabia to align with the US and continue,
[Guest 2]: essentially, with this sort of quite closed system, A, because it's not a democracy,
[Guest 2]: and B, because of natural resources and wealth. Ultimately, India was a poor country,
[Guest 2]: essentially turning or aligning with the US would, it kind of destroyed the intellectual
[Guest 2]: foundations of Nehruvian socialism, as I said, because there was this sort of boundary between
[Guest 2]: the nationalist and internationalist sort of versions, didn't really exist that firmly in
[Guest 2]: Nehru's mind. So it would have destroyed A, one crutch of the Nehruvian socialist project in
[Guest 2]: India. And B, it could well have destroyed the second crutch as well, because we do know that
[Guest 2]: aligning with the US necessarily, well, not necessarily, but generally means aligning with
[Guest 2]: the market. And most US allies, at least at that point in time, I mean, essentially, that's how
[Guest 2]: I mean, essentially, that's how that's how the East Asian economic miracle sort of happened was,
[Guest 2]: was aligning with the market. And that's not something Nehru really was down with.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, in fact, perhaps his biggest mistake, though, not a mistake that he saw
[Amit Varma]: play out during his lifetime, like he saw China play out. Now, you've described the
[Amit Varma]: events really well in the books, and things happen really fast. So, you know, he has an exchange with
[Amit Varma]: Rajagopalachari on November 1. On November 2, it's a verbal thing where, you know, instead of
[Amit Varma]: exchanging notes at the cabinet meeting, and meanwhile, Siddharth Patel is kind of chilling,
[Amit Varma]: hanging in the background. He's getting reports made for him from the Intelligence Bureau and so
[Amit Varma]: on. And then he writes this magisterial letter, which you've reproduced in your book on November
[Amit Varma]: 7. And I'll quickly quote you on that, where he says, in a celebrated letter of 7 November 1950,
[Amit Varma]: Patel deprecated the pathetic state of Indian diplomacy and called for a comprehensive review
[Amit Varma]: of Sino-Indian relations, a military and intelligence evaluation of the Chinese threat,
[Amit Varma]: a long term reconsideration of India's defense needs in terms of supplies and infrastructure,
[Amit Varma]: and the twin threats from China and Pakistan, examination and redisposition of forces to guard
[Amit Varma]: important areas that may be subject to dispute, improvement of communications in these areas,
[Amit Varma]: political and administrative steps to strengthen frontier governance, and an end to India's
[Amit Varma]: advocacy of China's entry into the UN. Recent and bitter history also tells us, Patel observed,
[Amit Varma]: that communism is no shield against imperialism. Stop quote. The sense that I got from reading the
[Amit Varma]: letter and the hard nosed approach and the kind of details that he went into is that look,
[Amit Varma]: internally as Home Minister, you see what he did, that he went in there in a cold calculated way,
[Amit Varma]: and he brought the princely states together. And of course, we can and I will dispute the
[Amit Varma]: means of doing that. But he got the job done. And you can see him take that same kind of approach
[Amit Varma]: to the question of foreign policy and to the question of China at an early stage,
[Amit Varma]: when you know, Tibet had not yet been taken over and everything was still kind of for grabs. And
[Amit Varma]: the irony is that, as you point out, the cabinet would have been against Nehru and with Patel in
[Amit Varma]: this. You write quote, in a showdown with the Prime Minister, Patel believed he could count
[Amit Varma]: on the strong support of Raj Gopalachari, K M Munshi, Baldev Singh, Jagjivan Ram and Sri Prakasa,
[Amit Varma]: while he expected Nehru to be backed by Maulana Azad, Gopal Swamy Iyengar and Rafi Ahmed Kidwai.
[Amit Varma]: It is likely that Ambedkar, given his views, would also have lined up behind Patel. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: Ambassador Henderson believed Nehru to be almost the only person in the government who still
[Amit Varma]: believed in friendship with Communist China. And Patel's letter is written on November 7.
[Amit Varma]: The cabinet meeting that is to follow is on November 21. Patel falls ill, he misses it.
[Amit Varma]: So only Raj Gopalachari speaks up, but Nehru prevails. And then shortly after that, Patel
[Amit Varma]: dies. And another counterfactual, obviously, and we won't really go there because one can go on
[Amit Varma]: forever with this particular one. And this is also a tragedy in multiple ways, not just because it
[Amit Varma]: sort of condemns, you know, India down this sort of the path that it takes, but also that it condemns
[Amit Varma]: Nehru to being a man alone, where, you know, the one guy who would have jostled with him and fought
[Amit Varma]: with him is kind of out of the picture. Now, earlier in this, in the exchange of letters that
[Amit Varma]: you reproduce, you know, they are talking about how, you know, when Gandhi was an interlocutor
[Amit Varma]: between the disputes, Gandhi made them stay together. He said that, why don't one of you
[Amit Varma]: form the government, one of you be outside, both of them volunteer to step down and let the other
[Amit Varma]: guy take over. But you know, in this matter of courtesy, they both kind of end up in the government
[Amit Varma]: and it almost sounds as if they're treating the governance of India as a personal affair,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where they can hand out sort of all of these things rather than something that is way
[Amit Varma]: more important than that. How likely, if Patel hadn't fallen ill, would he have been to prevail?
[Amit Varma]: Could there have been a realistic different direction? Or would Nehru have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: prevailed anyway, because he was Prime Minister and he, you know, might have said, oh, I will
[Amit Varma]: quit and do his emotional blackmail thing. What different direction was possible at this moment
[Guest 2]: in time? So, I mean, this motion of quitting is something actually that happens multiple times
[Guest 2]: in Nehru's career. So he does it at relatively frequent intervals. You know, he doesn't need
[Guest 2]: to do it after really after 1952. But it happens, you know, every few months in between, you know,
[Guest 2]: 1948 and 1951. It's sort of, you know, there are at least three or four occasions where this comes
[Guest 2]: up. And I don't think either of them actually meant the offer to quit the government in any
[Guest 2]: sincerity. It was the kind of political move that you play and say, okay, you know, I would leave,
[Guest 2]: I'll be the magnanimous person and leave. But actually, nobody has any intention of leaving.
[Guest 2]: So that's point one. The second point is that I think there was quite a strong likelihood that
[Guest 2]: Patel would prevail. Because from what we know is for Patel, this was actually the drawing of
[Guest 2]: the line. He'd been very content to leave foreign policy entirely to Nehru, to almost let Nehru run
[Guest 2]: it as a personal fiefdom. But something like this, which actually really jeopardized the nation's
[Guest 2]: security, sort of really forced Patel to sit up and take notice. Now, the assessment that sort of
[Guest 2]: Ambassador Henderson and that you get from Ambassador Henderson and from Patel's daughter's
[Guest 2]: diaries, Manipa and Patel's diaries, is a bit like actually Patel was quite likely to prevail.
[Guest 2]: It may not have been a kind of outright fight where Patel forced, flamboyantly forced a U-turn.
[Guest 2]: But as Henderson believed is that the U-turn would happen. And then it would kind of people
[Guest 2]: would pretend that it wasn't actually a U-turn. So it's unlikely that he would dethrone Nehru
[Guest 2]: and make him sort of humiliate him in public. But it's quite likely that he would have
[Guest 2]: forced a U-turn. And that U-turn would have come with, as I mentioned, all of these repercussions,
[Guest 2]: which is what you kind of notice if you read Nehru's reply. Because Nehru's reply doesn't
[Guest 2]: come in the form of a letter, which he could quite easily have written to Patel. But it comes
[Guest 2]: in the form of a note prepared to the cabinet, because that's actually where the fight is
[Guest 2]: happening. These letters are, in a sense, it's meant to be a performance for the cabinet,
[Guest 2]: this sort of argument between the two. And you get the sense from Nehru's note where he basically
[Guest 2]: dismisses many of Patel's concerns. And he dismisses them, mostly because he's kind of
[Guest 2]: aware of what the implications of such a U-turn are.
[Amit Varma]: I was also struck by the bits where you talk about what happens when it all falls apart. Like,
[Amit Varma]: at the start of that section, you write about how Nehru was shattered by the China war.
[Amit Varma]: You write, quote, in the words of his critic and parliamentary colleague H. V. Kamath,
[Amit Varma]: that the debacle not only shattered Nehru physically and weakened him mentally,
[Amit Varma]: but what was more galling to him, eroded his prestige in Asia and the world,
[Amit Varma]: dealt a crippling blow to his visions of leadership of the newly emancipated nations.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And later you write, it was a blow from which he never recovered. Accused of
[Amit Varma]: cravenness, vanity and negligence, his foreign policy in a shambles, his illusions of Asianism
[Amit Varma]: shattered, his self-appointed mantle of leadership of Asian nationalism in tatters,
[Amit Varma]: his policy of friendship towards China at all costs shown to have been a dangerous misjudgment.
[Amit Varma]: The shock of the defeat is said to have precipitated his death in 1964,
[Amit Varma]: though not before he had been forced to jettison his much-wanted non-alignment
[Amit Varma]: and swallow his pride and beg Kennedy for direct military intervention.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And of course, you know, quoted Kennedy on what he said about that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sort of struck here by a broad question about leadership and politics in general.
[Amit Varma]: That is it the case that when you ascend to high office, that you have been sort of so performative
[Amit Varma]: and so strong on a certain set of principles which you might have espoused and so on, that in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you have no choice but to stick to them and be dogmatic, like, you know, Adil, like you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: that high office can lead to a narrowing of the imagination. And therefore, once you are in power,
[Amit Varma]: you then have to maintain whatever self delusions that you might have, which really makes every
[Amit Varma]: leader a little bit like a King Lear, I suppose, especially if you, you know, if you are in power,
[Amit Varma]: especially if you kind of die like Nehru did. And obviously, this is one event that completely shatters
[Amit Varma]: your illusions, you have to admit you were wrong, because you were obviously wrong.
[Amit Varma]: But most of the time, you don't have to admit you're wrong, you know, even in modern times,
[Amit Varma]: you can go on and say, no, no, demonetization was good, we got rid of black money.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to admit to your sort of mistakes at all. So, you know, in all your study of all of
[Amit Varma]: these, you know, great intellectual figures, you know, some have ascended to power, some haven't.
[Amit Varma]: Would you say that there is a greater tendency for those who haven't ascended to power to kind of
[Amit Varma]: keep the dialogue going the dialogue with themselves also, not just with the rest of the world?
[Amit Varma]: And that once you sort of ascend to a position of power have having taken certain positions,
[Amit Varma]: you're kind of stuck? Or was it just that Nehru was particularly rigid and that everybody doesn't
[Guest 1]: have to be like that? Maybe I can just come in on that question. So I do think that
[Guest 1]: you touched on a very deep truth that is self-evident to Nehru to an extent that he
[Guest 1]: never critically reflects it. And that's not the basic notion of a specific socialist state that
[Guest 1]: espouses specific anti-capitalist reforms and therefore naturally allies with an emerging
[Guest 1]: power like China's. But the basic juxtaposition that Nehru sees is one of white people who are
[Guest 1]: the imperialists and of non-white people who are resisting that and they tend to be poor, etc.
[Guest 1]: What Nehru doesn't understand that in the 19th century, through Chinese eyes, imperialism looks
[Guest 1]: very different and it looks very Indian. So when they lose the first Opium Wars, they're fighting
[Guest 1]: against Indians who are, of course, employed by the British East India Company and therefore,
[Guest 1]: you know, sort of dispatched in order to fight that war for them. Same for the second war that
[Guest 1]: the Chinese lose against Britain. When you look at places like Hong Kong and Chinese,
[Guest 1]: a large portion of the population is Indian and Indian traders who are running some of the
[Guest 1]: biggest companies who are running the hotels. And therefore, through Chinese eyes, imperialism has
[Guest 1]: always looked Indian. And I think Nehru is really shattered when he realizes that what he stood
[Guest 1]: against was maybe, you know, the sort of simplistic color coding which he took for granted
[Guest 1]: and it looked very different through Chinese eyes because for the Chinese, it was either Indian or
[Guest 1]: it was Japanese. These were the two people who were sort of coming and invading their countries
[Guest 1]: and sort of chucking out large portions and who were implementing the capitalism. And of course,
[Guest 1]: there were white people too, but it wasn't as simplistic as it was in Nehru's mind. So that
[Guest 1]: when that came crushing down, I think something deeper within him realized that the basic truth
[Guest 1]: on which he has based much of his political philosophy on didn't really function. And it
[Guest 1]: was deeper than just the sort of socialism that we usually ascribe to him. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I've taken up more than three hours of your time, and there's a fourth section of the book,
[Amit Varma]: but the fourth section of the book, in a sense, is covered in a separate book that
[Amit Varma]: Thrupudaman has written and that I already have a two and a half hour episode on,
[Amit Varma]: which I really enjoyed doing. And in fact, I keep referring to that episode in other episodes. So
[Amit Varma]: I'll just point my listeners to that. You know, the reason I keep referring to that episode is to
[Amit Varma]: point out how history is not simple, that people contain multitudes and there is so much sort of
[Amit Varma]: nuance to everything. You know, people tend to paint Nehru in these extremist ways, he destroyed
[Amit Varma]: India or he was a great liberal. And the point is, of course, the truth is neither of those.
[Amit Varma]: He was a very complex man who got a lot right and got a lot wrong. And one of the things he wasn't
[Amit Varma]: was a great liberal, like the First Amendment, which he kind of carried out was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: his argument against fundamental rights as it were, which among other things, you know, hit
[Amit Varma]: the right to free speech really hard. Like we talk about how the sedition law is misused today. And
[Amit Varma]: we talk about how it's part of the IPC, we should never have had it. But the point is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Tripudaman pointed out in his book is that it was declared unconstitutional in 1950. And then Nehru
[Amit Varma]: brought it back because he wanted to, you know, suppress the press, for example. And he, of course,
[Amit Varma]: had eloquent justifications of that which are in the book, but even more eloquent, Shama Prasad
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee's defenses of personal liberty, which I found really inspiring, and which is against,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the traditional views of him as sort of the founder of the precursor to the BJP,
[Amit Varma]: the Jan Sangh, and therefore, he must be a Hindu nationalist, but stands out as a fine, liberal
[Amit Varma]: thinker actually embodying rationality, at least in these particular debates. But for that, I'll
[Amit Varma]: just point people to the episode that I had with Tripudaman. I'll end with not end with this is,
[Amit Varma]: let's say the penultimate question, because I leave one about books for last. But my penultimate
[Amit Varma]: question is this, that what your book is about, and what a lot of your study is about, and what
[Amit Varma]: you said animated you at Cambridge and made that a special time for you, is intellectual history,
[Amit Varma]: is the importance of ideas. And this book is about ideas. This book is about debates over ideas that
[Amit Varma]: mattered then and matter now. But what we see in the public discourse is not ideas. What we see is
[Amit Varma]: narratives, narratives that, oh, this happened, and therefore, we must do this. So therefore,
[Amit Varma]: we must take revenge, or therefore, they are bad, and we are good. We see narratives about people.
[Amit Varma]: So when people, you know, when Nehru is mentioned, it is either, either he's all black, or he's all
[Amit Varma]: white, and so on down the line. When Savarkar is mentioned, he is either a coward who apologized
[Amit Varma]: to the British, or he's this great hero. And all of these people, you know, whether it's Nehru,
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi, Savarkar, Vajpayee, all of these people contained multitudes, and there is so much death,
[Amit Varma]: but no one gives, no one really cares. And my stand always has been that I don't know why we
[Amit Varma]: discuss these people so much, and I've heated ideas over people. I would rather have conversations
[Amit Varma]: about ideas. Why talk about Savarkar when you can talk about Hindutva? You know, why talk about
[Amit Varma]: Nehru when you can talk about this aspect or that, that aspect and all of that? And of course,
[Amit Varma]: you guys are talking about it in the historical context of how ideas evolved and affected real
[Amit Varma]: life. But does it feel sometimes, or if you could react to the possibility now that this is a bit of
[Amit Varma]: an anomaly that we live in an age where people just care about narratives and not about ideas?
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it's great that you guys are doing what you're doing. But do you sometimes feel that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, you know, what's the point? Who's listening? If I can just answer that, because it's a
[Guest 1]: methodological question. And the methodological question is not so much about the narrative
[Guest 1]: versus ideas, but it's about context. And context in the sense that if you do history, and not
[Guest 1]: philosophy, then what you care about is the specific context in which ideas are embedded in,
[Guest 1]: because you think that we can understand ideas better once we understand what the other modes
[Guest 1]: of existence of these ideas were. Now, you can do intellectual history in many different forms. So
[Guest 1]: you can just focus on the ideas and how they're engaging with other ideas in a sort of abstract
[Guest 1]: world of ideas. Or you can sort of make it more personal and write a narrative that is gripping,
[Guest 1]: that sort of takes the reader along and shows him how specific ideas may have emerged. I do think
[Guest 1]: that there's a specific kind of modesty involved in doing the letter, because it means that you're
[Guest 1]: essentially trying to contextualize things in such a way that are palatable to people. If you start
[Guest 1]: doing the engagement of pure ideas, like a guy who used to be at Harvard 100 years ago called
[Guest 1]: Arthur Lovejoy, then you end up writing very dense accounts where there is a specific normative
[Guest 1]: strength of idea that you're trying to work out. And if other people agree with that normative
[Guest 1]: idea or not, of course, depends on what kind of perceptions they bring to this very debate.
[Guest 1]: But I do think that for historians, the important thing is to sort of capture a specific way in
[Guest 1]: which the ideas were formulated and formed. And the other way in which we try to anchor those
[Guest 1]: ideas is then in legal provisions. So as you could probably tell by reading the book, a lot of it is
[Guest 1]: anchored through the law. And that, again, gives us a kind of way through which we can make those
[Guest 1]: ideas appear in a concrete form for the reader to understand of why it matters that people thought
[Guest 1]: about things, because you can see them implemented in black and whites in things such as the
[Guest 1]: Constitution and other forms of legislations. So that's how I would answer the question. But of
[Guest 1]: course, we could go into in depth and, you know, talk about the big debate of philosophy versus
[Guest 1]: history in the 18th century and, you know, why it is that the discipline sort of departed from
[Guest 1]: a standalone philosophy.
[Amit Varma]: No, just to clarify, I didn't mean it in that sense. I wasn't talking about ideas versus
[Amit Varma]: narratives in an abstract sense. I mean, we make sense of the world through narratives. So we only
[Amit Varma]: understand ideas also through narratives, like your wonderful narratives. What I kind of meant
[Amit Varma]: was that people today don't care about ideas at all. That, you know, just to give a concrete
[Amit Varma]: example of what I mean, you know, if we debate nationalism, for many people today, for many on
[Amit Varma]: the Hindu right, for example, nationalism today would be about that, oh, the Muslims came and
[Amit Varma]: they oppressed us, but now we will have our Hindu Rashtra. And that is our narrative. And that is,
[Amit Varma]: that is what therefore becomes prescriptive and flows out of the narrative and doesn't flow out
[Amit Varma]: of any ideas. Whereas at the level of ideas, the, you know, the debates like they were,
[Amit Varma]: you know, between Nehru and Iqbal and so on would be about what is nationalism really?
[Amit Varma]: How do we define it? You know, what kind of nationalism is good for us, rather than going
[Amit Varma]: to these narratives of victimhood or oppression or whatever. So that's kind of what I meant.
[Amit Varma]: That, you know, you guys should do much more of exactly what you're doing. And you will certainly
[Amit Varma]: have many readers like me. But in the larger context of what is actually happening out there,
[Amit Varma]: ideas aren't being discussed, you know, Nehru and Iqbal and Jinnah and all of these people,
[Amit Varma]: whether you agree with them or don't agree with them. And I think in all of these people,
[Amit Varma]: we can agree with aspects and disagree with aspects. But those debates and discussions
[Amit Varma]: are taking place, you know, which is not somehow I don't see them taking place at that level today.
[Guest 1]: I would agree. But at the same time, I would probably give it a more sort of optimistic spin,
[Guest 1]: because what I see is thousands and millions of people entering into these debates. And yes,
[Guest 1]: they're entering with simplistic sort of narratives that, you know, sort of explain
[Guest 1]: everything to them. But at the same time, they can't shield themselves from the type of exposure
[Guest 1]: that they're getting from your podcast from other people. And I do think that once that exposure
[Guest 1]: sort of, you know, penetrates their own idea and sort of challenges that then, you know, they're
[Guest 1]: faced with the very simple complexity that we discussed here in this podcast. So I do think that
[Guest 1]: one can see that also optimistically, because whenever you have a big chunk of the population
[Guest 1]: sort of entering into a public discourse, as many million Indians and Pakistanis did with
[Guest 1]: the emergence of the internet and other means of communication that entirely changed the sort of
[Guest 1]: paradigm that was existent before, then of course, you know, there will be people who will be swayed
[Guest 1]: by simplistic narratives. But at the same time, you know, there's exposure. And I do think with
[Guest 1]: time, people will also discuss ideas again, as they as we write as they did in the from the 40s to the
[Guest 1]: 60s.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's a fantastic point. And I buy that optimism, because, you know, if I was alive in
[Amit Varma]: say, Nehru and Jinnah's time, I would not have known of the debate or had a way to enter it,
[Amit Varma]: or been able to inform myself to take part in it. And now at least millions of people, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: can take part in these debates. And perhaps if I was sort of lamenting, I'm committing the mistake
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, not taking Sturgeon's law into account. Sturgeon's law, of course, is 98%
[Amit Varma]: of everything is crap. So, you know, you can romanticize the past and just see the best
[Amit Varma]: discussions that happened then. And today, you can see all the nonsense that is around. But hey,
[Amit Varma]: it's always kind of been like that. My final question for both of you is, you know, one of
[Amit Varma]: the sort of it's almost become a meme on the show that people build seen in the unseen bookshelves
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. So I'll end by asking both of you to recommend as many books as you want,
[Amit Varma]: you know, three to five or whatever, whatever comes to your mind, recommend books that you feel
[Amit Varma]: everybody must read, you know, not just for purposes of illumination, but even books that
[Amit Varma]: you've just enjoyed or been entertained by or that make you want to stand in a soapbox and say,
[Guest 1]: hey, read this, this is great. I can go first. Since I already spoke so much about William
[Guest 1]: Hayslett, I do think that his book on Shakespeare is possibly the best thing that I've read. And
[Guest 1]: it actually introduced me to Shakespeare. Before that, I felt Shakespeare was the sort of stuffy
[Guest 1]: guy, because the way in which you encounter Shakespeare in the German education system is
[Guest 1]: through this guy called Schlegel, also known as the inventor of the Proto-Indo-European languages
[Guest 1]: and all that kind of system, right? So he's the sort of systematic guy, and he discovered
[Guest 1]: Shakespeare translated into German and then really harped on about like the mythical dimension of
[Guest 1]: Shakespeare. So wherever, you know, you could leave the abode of humanity behind and go into
[Guest 1]: a different sphere, Schlegel would do that. And that Shakespeare, I didn't really like that much.
[Guest 1]: And with Hayslett, he really opened up to the humanistic everyday Shakespeare. So the characters
[Guest 1]: of the play, you know, what were they about? What were their worries? And it remains to me,
[Guest 1]: possibly one of the nicest accounts. And the good thing is, it's a book that you can probably
[Guest 1]: download from Google Books, because it's in the public domain, and it has been for
[Guest 1]: at least a century. And of course, he comes also against the other big Shakespeare interpretation,
[Guest 1]: because 19th century was very much about the rediscovery of the genius. And, you know,
[Guest 1]: they were all sort of going on about Shakespeare. But the other one would be the Samuel Johnson one,
[Guest 1]: the guy from the dictionary, who also wrote a very meaningful and big interpretation of Shakespeare.
[Guest 1]: But the Hayslett one is really the one for me, and that I do think everybody should read in order
[Guest 1]: to, at least for me, it opened up the ability to appreciate Shakespeare. The other book that I
[Guest 1]: would recommend is because we've spoken so much about China, is something that Emily Hahn wrote,
[Guest 1]: that I also mentioned is the American travel writer that I really enjoy reading. And she
[Guest 1]: wrote a book on the Sung sisters. Now, the Sung sisters were three women born to a Methodist
[Guest 1]: preacher, who all happened to have very exciting careers. One of them becomes the vice chairman of
[Guest 1]: the Communist Party that rules over the People's Republic. The other one marries Cenka Cek, so
[Guest 1]: becomes Madam Cenka Cek, and, you know, goes with the Nationalists on the other side. And it's a
[Guest 1]: really, really interesting portrayal of the relationships and the emotional life worlds of
[Guest 1]: those three sisters that Emily Hahn writes. It's called the Sung sisters, which I really think
[Guest 1]: people should read in order to really encapsulate the spirit of China at the time, which was one of
[Guest 1]: great transformations, where literally these things could happen, that you could have somebody
[Guest 1]: who's at the highest levels of the Communist Party, and at the same time, also closely related
[Guest 1]: to the Nationalists. The books that I've read more recently, that I've really enjoyed since we've
[Guest 1]: spoken about the opium war so much, is Empire of Pain, by Patrick O'Keefe, who's, or just Patrick
[Guest 1]: O'Keefe, who's written about the Sackler family and the way in which they accumulated their wealth
[Guest 1]: through the marketing of opium, essentially, as OxyContin in the latest variation. And that book
[Guest 1]: really, for many of the readers, will bring back like the old debates of the opium wars, because
[Guest 1]: essentially, many of the arguments that it can be used for, you know, specific purposes in the
[Guest 1]: initially for recreational purposes, etc, is almost like the same script playing over again,
[Guest 1]: only in a democratic setting, whereas early on, it had played on an imperial setting. It's a book
[Guest 1]: that I greatly enjoyed. And since we're staying with the topic of China, the other one that I
[Guest 1]: really enjoyed reading is The Last Kings of Shanghai. It was written by Jonathan Kaufman. I
[Guest 1]: think he's a Financial Times, he's a journalist who works at the Financial Times. And he essentially
[Guest 1]: wrote a comparative narrative about Baghdadi Jewish families and the way in which they, in
[Guest 1]: which these families managed to keep a specific tradition intact while completely opening up to
[Guest 1]: to the capitalist forces of the 19th and 20th century. And it's nice because it really begins
[Guest 1]: in Baghdad, where they're sort of advising the Sultan, and then it moves all the way forward to,
[Guest 1]: I think it ends in the 1960s or 70s. So it's really a fantastic book because it gives you
[Guest 1]: multiple hundred years of history condensed in one volume. So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I can't wait to dig into these. Dhrupadaman?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, so before I get into the books, just sort of two quick asides. One was about the narratives,
[Guest 2]: and that was, I think it's something that I've felt quite a lot, is one of the reasons is that
[Guest 2]: actually, a lot of good scholarship and good writing is just simply not available in vernacular
[Guest 2]: languages. And if you're a university student, or if you're a kind of journalist in the vernacular
[Guest 2]: languages, et cetera, it's actually you are never really going to be exposed in any meaningful sense
[Guest 2]: to a lot of writing and scholarship, both about, forget about the rest of the world,
[Guest 2]: but even about India, a lot of the, most of the writing, at least in history and in political
[Guest 2]: theory, is done in English. It's completely inaccessible to the sort of average university
[Guest 2]: student in India. So it's not a surprise that all of these sort of, sometimes even when I
[Guest 2]: look at them talking about history, it's a bit like the debates or the kind of intellectual
[Guest 2]: shifts that have happened in the past 70 years have really passed them by in a way, just because
[Guest 2]: they've all happened in English, and none of them are really available to the vast majority of
[Guest 2]: the Indian public. So I think that's one of the big reasons that a lot of kind of intellectual
[Guest 2]: shifts and arguments are just never make it past the small Chaturati class in India.
[Guest 2]: And then, just because Adil mentioned Chiang Kai-shek, there's a really funny incident,
[Guest 2]: and Ram Manohar Lohia writes about it in his book, when, about the fact that there was once
[Guest 2]: a banquet in Viceroy's house, when Chiang Kai-shek visited India, and Lord Linus Goh actually
[Guest 2]: complained about the amount of attention that Madame Chiang Kai-shek was paying Nehru, and he
[Guest 2]: said, you know, disparagingly said, oh, Madame only has eyes for her boyfriend. So yeah, there
[Guest 2]: you have it. I think about books, some of the books that I've, I think, recently that I've
[Guest 2]: really read, top of the list, for me, because I keep going back to it all the time, is Sigmund
[Guest 2]: Bauman's Liquid Modernity. And for me, that's, you know, nothing really kind of explains the
[Guest 2]: modern world in the way that Bauman does. He's able to kind of put, you know, their garbled
[Guest 2]: thoughts that I would have about the kind of disjunctures that modernity really creates. And
[Guest 2]: Bauman is able to explain that, you know, with such finesse that, you know, that's a book that
[Guest 2]: I just keep returning to all the time. The second, I think, and again, I mentioned William Dalrymple,
[Guest 2]: again, Dalrymple's Anarchy, and that has by far been the best book in history that I've read
[Guest 2]: in a long, long time. And by like, such a huge distance that, you know, I keep it on my bookshelf
[Guest 2]: as a reminder about how history can be written, about how it can be, how it can be, you know,
[Guest 2]: it can be both rigorous and really fascinating. So that's that I'd say is the second. Something
[Guest 2]: that I really enjoyed recently was Josie Joseph's Silent Coup, mainly because I think it touches on
[Guest 2]: again, a hugely important, completely neglected subject in India. It's the kind of dark underbelly
[Guest 2]: of the Indian security establishment, which we neither want to admit to nor engage with. Most
[Guest 2]: often, we don't even want to know about it. But I found that both, you know, sort of revealing
[Guest 2]: and disturbing in equal measure, and all credit to Josie for writing it, especially at a time like
[Guest 2]: this, when you know, that's writing something like this can ruffle feathers. Apart from that,
[Guest 2]: something else that's always a classic in my head is Great Expectations. That's another book that I
[Guest 2]: keep going back to. I love how Dickens can construct that sort of story. And it kind of
[Guest 2]: provokes a lot of, you know, thinking and emotion in me. An Indian writer whose writing that I've
[Guest 2]: actually really come to enjoy is Siddharth Dhanvant Sanghvi. And I've read his book,
[Guest 2]: Lost Flamingos of Bombay, which I really liked, but he came out a couple of years ago
[Guest 2]: with a illustrated book called, I think it's called The Squirrel and the Rabbit. And the
[Guest 2]: illustrations are beautiful, but it's the writing. It's some of the cleverest writing that I've ever
[Guest 2]: read. And I found it profoundly moving. It's, you know, it looks like a children's book, but it's,
[Guest 2]: you know, anything but. And I found the writing, you know, very lyrical, very algae, very moving.
[Guest 2]: And actually, if someone was to quiz me on what's the best book that I'd read in the last three,
[Guest 2]: four years, five years, I would definitely pick that. I've given about 10 of them as presents.
[Guest 2]: And it's possibly the best book that I've read in the last few years.
[Amit Varma]: Well, fantastic suggestions. I think I'm going to spend the rest of tonight just
[Amit Varma]: kind of getting these books and beginning to read. So guys, thank you so much for your
[Amit Varma]: patience. It's been great. I love reading your book. I hope, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I hope to continue reading your books for many, many years to come. So
[Amit Varma]: more power to you guys. Thank you so much.
[Guest 1]: Thank you so much for having us, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, thank you for having us, Amit. Absolute pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.